everybody. Thanks for the opportunity to be here.
So my name's Stu Hamilton. I'm the Chief Executive of Mercury, and I'm supported
today with Christina Healey. I can see Christina there.
Christina is our Principal Policy and Planning Advisor.
So I'll talk for about, 10 minutes or so, and then leave plenty of time for
questions. The more technical questions, Christina will answer, and I'll, I'll
stick with the higher level strategic questions.
So we're, we're here to speak to our, our submission.
Uh, we also have sup- support the, the detailed submission from the
Electricity Sector Environment Group, which I believe, you've seen.
It contains rationale and potential solutions, and guide rails we'll think will
help.
My framing today is pretty simple.
And New Zealand needs to build and maintain renewable electricity infrastructure at
scale. And we need to do that in a way that keeps operating reliably because
that underpins electrification, that underpins emissions reduction and
economic growth. These bills take a funnel approach, and that
means to us that the biggest gains come from getting the upstream settings
right. Those are the national instruments and the regional combined plans,
so that the downstream and consenting and permitting is far more predictable
and less adversarial. We're conscious that dur-
durable reform has to carry social license, and that's for communities,
iwi, and the whole country as a whole.
And so Mercury's long-term aspiration is called Tuatara, which is to be
the partner of choice, and that shapes how we develop and how we operate, and
also shapes our approach to these bills.
So with that in mind, there are three core points that we've made throughout
our submission. The first one is to front load the effort
on upstream settings to ensure the downstream decisions are
reliable, high quality and predictable.
The second is to make environmental limits and biodiversity setting
workable in practice, especially for complex catchments and
existing operations. And the third is to keep consents and
per- permits proportionate, disciplined and durable, as that will
strengthen the social license that I just spoke to, spoke about.
This is important to Mercury because we're currently investing at scale, and our
half year results that we presented just a few weeks ago confirmed
three key things that we're currently doing.
The first is a five hundred and ninety million dollar hydro enhancement program
that's on the Waikato River that will provide an additional power for eight
thousand homes a year and extend the life stations for many
decades. The second is the Ngātamareki fifth-year
thermal unit, which we are officially opening tomorrow, and it started
generating power in January. That produces enough power for about
fifty thousand homes a year. Uh, and this third point
is the two wind farms that we've currently got under construction.
One in the far south, in Southland, and one in
Northland. Both of those will produce enough power for another eighty-seven
thousand homes. So those are pretty significant, three projects
alongside a, a large development pipeline we have, which has
about seventeen terawatt-hours of energy in it.
Just to put that into context, that would be enough to provide another two million
homes if we built all that. So we're not, we're not short of opportunity.
So these long-lived infrastructure investments, they sit right at the intersection
of the energy trilemma, to make sure we're keeping supply secure,
prices affordable, and doing it sustainably.
We have a strategic framework in Mercury, which is called Better
Today, Building Tomorrow and Brighter Together, and this reform
translates really well into that.
We need to run the existing assets safely and responsibly.
We need to build new g- new generation for New Zealand and do it in a way that
communities and iwi can benefit from it in the long term.
So just coming back, I'll touch on those three core messages I spoke to.
Uh, the first one was around getting the upstream settings right to unlock the
speed and the quality of the downstream.
And the message there is that the bill's promise of a more permissive, faster
system really does depend on the upstream quality of the national
instruments and the regional plans.
So we support a plan-led system where we have a clear hierarchy
of strong national direction, including more standardization to
improve consistency. We also support the planning bill's clearer
delineation of what effects are in scope and out of sco- scope because
that improves predictability. Two practical asks from our
submission. First, when the national instruments are developed or
reviewed, they require strong technical input.
Uh, that includes from technical practitioners, so that the standards are
workable and, and implementable.
Second, ensure meaningful early engagement with iwi authorities
on the first suite of instruments.
That's really critical to ensure that it's durable and it reduces the conflict that
may or may come later. And then on spatial planning, we support
identifying broad opportunities and constraints for renewable
generation, but we caution against overly prescriptive zoning
that could lock, site allocation and become
anti-competitive. The system needs to enable projects that are technically and
commercially feasible while still managing the real environmental
constraints. So our bottom line there is if we want better decisions downstream,
we have to work on the upstream, providing evidence-based national
instruments, implementable plan and partnership baked in right from the
start. Second message, core message was around environmental
limits that must lift outcomes without destabilizing existing
renewable generation. And so our message there is about
environmental limits and how they land in the real world.
Mercury supports environmental limits that deliver strong environmental
outcomes, but limits only work if they come from cl--
but limits that only work if they come from clear
responsibilities, clear compliance pathways, and a fair approach to
allocation and catchments that have multiple contributors.
So in our submission, we're very direct in that place.
We-- The framework needs to clearly address how limits interact with each
other, especially with lawful operations currently underway, including
how any allocation will actually operate.
Otherwise, we'll create the uncertainty of disputes and you risk constraining
generation that currently exists in ways that undermine energy
security. So for Mercury, hydro is a really clear example.
If you're using the Waikato hydro scheme, if any environmental limit
is exceeded at a catchment scale-The system must be clear on how
responsibility is allocated and what actions are required so
operators aren't subject to unpredictable operational constraints.
So we strongly support adaptive management being explicitly embedded as a
term, as a tool inside both the bills.
It matters most where knowledge evolves over time, and geothermal's another really
good example. At Ngātamareke, that, the field I just spoke to
before, field management relies on monitoring the key reservoir
parameters to making sure that it's sustainable over time, and you're
continually injec- in- adjusting the amount of fluid that you inject back
into the field and how much production you're taking out of the field to manage the
pressure and temperature of the reservoir.
And so that approach protects the resource and the environment without forcing
constant consent variations. So our point here is that
strong outcomes require clarity and implementability, not
just ambition, and the framework should drive improvement over time
without accidentally eroding the existing renewable
generation. Our final message, the, the third message, is
about keeping delivery settings disciplined and proportionate, and
avoiding creating any new delay, rights.
So this is really about delivery and about having confidence in the system.
Um, there's three key points in our submission.
Firstly, appeal rights should be confirmed to matters r- raised in
submissions. Allowing new matters on appeal just increases the
uncertainty and cost and creates incentives for tactical behavior.
Next bullet point, procedural review rights.
They need to be tight framed and short time limits, otherwise you create
new delay rights for people who are not directly affected.
And thirdly, permitted pathways matter.
Uh, mandatory registration of all permitted activities would add an ad-
administrative burden with little environmental gain in our view.
It would make routine maintenance and minor upgrades really hard.
We also support time-certain pathways for specified energy
activities, but only if extension and procedural review settings are tightly
framed so the pathways stay credible.
And a point particularly relevant to renewables is that we support retaining the
planning bill's exclusion of general landscape effects, visual amenity,
and views from private property. Let me bring that to life with, our
Turitea wind farm and our board of inquiry process.
Our final consented layout was for 60 turbines.
Uh, that was a significant reduction for what was applied for, which was over 120
turbines. Landscape and visual effects were the contributing factors to that
outcome. So we accepted at the time that outcome and the project was
built. It shows that we do make real changes in respect to landscape
values and community concerns, but it also shows why the system needs
clear boundaries and nationally consistent scope rules.
So in closing, Mercury supports the direction of these reforms.
We think the bills can materially improve consistency, reduce process
cost, and strengthen long-term confidence, provided the guardrails
adopt, are adopted so we can get strong environmental outcomes with practical
delivery. So three points to recap on, put the effort into
upstream settings so downstream decisions are high quality and predictable,
make environmental limits and biovesil- biodiversity settings
workable in practice, especially for complex catchments and
existing operations, and keep consents and permits
proportionate, disciplined, and durable because this will strengthen the social
license and enables delivery. So thank you very much.
Uh, Christine and myself are very happy to take your questions.
Look, thank you very much, Stu. Uh, we've got our first question from Scott
Willis.
Thank you, Stu. Um,
sorry, I've got... Hang on, I've got a niggle here.
Yeah, we can let you back there, Scott.
Um, y- y- y- you-
Do, do you want to, just try and sort out your audio there, Scott, and
I will, just jump in with a question?
Yeah, yeah.
'Cause I was quite interested, Stu, in your submission, around
environmental limits and how that kind of
could adversely impact the energy sector and, and,
and your sector, because it's been talked about a lot through
our submissions and obviously a lot of people have, varying views on
it. Um, just interested how practically it
currently, you know, would impact you.
You've obviously provided some solutions here.
So I'm just wondering if you could just give us a, a quick, overview of
that.
Absolutely. Christine, do you wanna provide some technical detail there?
And I can jump in.
Sure, yes. Um, so
we, we do believe environmental limits are necessary.
We're not saying don't have environmental limits 'cause that's not feasible.
Um, what we really need to be, sort of the guardrails that need
to be in place and how environmental limits are set and how they're managed
is around particularly in catchments.
If you're looking at a catchment scale, and, Stu
mentioned the Waikato Hydro Scheme, the, the
limits in, in the h- Waikato very rarely are linked to one
specific person or one specific activity.
Usually it's a cumulative thing, if you're looking at environmental limits at
that level. And so having the right sort of,
responsibilities in place, allocation in
terms of who is responsible for actioning any,
changes or, or, or developments or measures that need to be put in
place to improve against that limit,
then those need to be spelt out at the start so that
we don't find we're all inadvertently having to put constraints on the way
we operate because somebody else is behaving within
the catchment effectively.
Mm.
Okay. No, thank you. I mean, it's quite a weighty part in your submission
there, so, no, thanks for that clarification.
Look, we'll try you again, Scott. We'll see if your audio's working.
Thank you. Um, and thanks Stu and Christina.
Um-
I apologise for the muck up earlier.
Uh, look, I really get your point about, visual,
visual effects and having had a wind farm declined
on the only thing it could be declined on, which was vis- visual
impact. I'm, I'm very sympathetic.
But, look, to the, the point that you've
said that national- consistent national direction is key,
really I've got a couple of questions there.
Would a bipartisan
national energy strategy provide that, that greater certainty that,
that you think the sector needs? That's, that's
one. And then
a second question, spatial planning you've talked about from page nine
onwards, are you comfortable that local
government has all the resources and expertise available to lead
on that spatial planning? And then,
well, then I'll, I'll get, I'll then I've got a, one follow-up
question.
Sure. I, I can touch on the, the first question was on basically strategy,
right? A national energy strategy and, and maybe Christina you can touch on the
spatial planning. So national, energy strategy absolutely would
make a big difference, across industry,
certainly for Mercury, but also more broadly because it, what it does is it sets
really clear direction that we can then, get on with
investing to and understanding what it looks like.
So w- we've certainly been a big advocate of that and would love to see that,
come through. Now, having cross-party, support would be fantastic 'cause
that, that then provides, sustainability and, and longevity of it.
So yep, we'd very much like to see that, and it would make a big difference.
Um, spatial planning, Christina, you could probably-
Um,
spatial planning I think for renewables particularly works brilliantly
for existing sites. Um, where we tread
into unknown territory is how
the competitive nature of our s- our business, so the electricity
sector is a competitive market-based system.
If we start prescribing where renewable
electricity can go or needs to go, like development areas and
things like that, we become a lot more constrained.
Um, one, I don't think spatial planning will be able to move as
quickly as the market can and as we can, and so
therefore there will be missed opportunities if we can't
mobilize to go where the power needs to go, where that
renewable generation needs to be built.
Whether or not regional councils have that capability or councils have that
capability, I think with existing renewables,
absolutely, because they're already dealing with it, and I think as long as we're
at the table and having that conversation with them as well,
then yes, I think we can achieve good things.
But I do think, there needs to be stronger guardrails around
how, competition and renewables are planned for in
the, in a spatial planning context.
Thank you. And have I got one sup, if I may?
Yeah, one sup. Go for it, Scott.
Thank you. And, I think w- what we've seen
elsewhere in other jurisdictions is that, local area energy
planning, which is not really spatial planning, it's, it's involving
greater participation from local government but also iwi
community and the energy sector, like
EDBs and transmit- Transpower
developers. Do you see that
local area energy planning could, could
improve on the spatial planning aspect to
enable development and, and enable that more distributed,
renewables that we need?
Potentially, yeah, potentially.
I mean, I know we've been involved, particularly in the Waikato with those sort of
discussions with the regional, Waikato Regional Council.
So yeah, I do think potentially because you're right, those people are already at
the table having the conversation about
renew- renewables and electricity within their region,
understanding where industry is that needs to d- decarbonize,
understanding where growth is going to occur.
All of those things help us when it comes to knowing where to
invest.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, I might just jump in quickly with another question because
obviously you spoke about the huge potential that there is within
the energy sector to bring on renewable energy, and you gave some
examples. Um, and I'm assuming that a lot of these have
taken, you know, reasonable amount of time to get up and running at the
moment. What's the, the cost do you think saving?
Have you done any kind of numbers, around that in terms
of improving the resource management system to be able to get this
renewable energy up and running faster?
Haven't, haven't got any specific dollar numbers that I can, I can point to, but
it'll be in the many millions of dollars for us.
Um, I look at the, the time it takes us from a, a
twinkle in an eye to actually producing electricity, so from a
spark in the brain to a spark on the grid.
Um, at, at the moment that could be four or five years at best.
Um, for some of our projects it could be seven or eight years.
Uh, and, and at best it, it, it can probably be a couple of years.
So, that sort of time in between going from eight to two years makes a
significant difference. So now resource...
Uh, consenting is one aspect. There are obviously a number of other things that,
that are important to actually get the project off the ground, but you're talking
about, you know, four, five years, in a project which
we're typically spending, you know, half a billion to a billion dollars worth
that can add significant cost.
And does that also, you know, cause concern around certainty, I suppose, of
investment as well?
Yeah, yeah, very much so. So, w-we have a suite of
projects that we've got on our planning board, and we're trying to progress
them all at the right pace based on how good the projects are, but consenting comes
into that as well. So, potentially what it does is it means that the amount of
money we're trying to investing, not ourselves, but it'll be international
investment as well, it will absolutely be affected by how fast
those projects can be consented or consented at all.
Because for you, for us to be putting money at the early phase-
Mm
... you do need to have some confidence that a portion of those projects will get
through the consenting framework, or, or you do, you do get a bit
gun-shy and pull back from the amount that you invest.
Or you focus on the projects that might not be the best for New
Zealand's electricity grid but might be the most consentable, and that
ultimately is not, not the best thing for, for New Zealand as a whole.
Mm. Now, look, we're gonna have to leave it there, Stu.
We've met time today. Uh, we appreciate, both of you
coming on and your very weighty, thorough submission with a lot of
considerations and, and lots of feedback there. So we appreciate that.
Great. Thanks for the opportunity.
Bye. Thank you. Thank you.
Bye.
So moving on to our next submission today, we have the New Zealand
Conservation Authority.
And we can see you there, Edward,
Wendy, and Paul. There we
go. We have you all with us. Welcome to the select committee this
afternoon. You have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to
you to, run us through the main points in your submission and then of course
open for questions.
Tena koe Chair mana me nga member o te komiti kaiwhirowhiri.
Tena ra koutou. Ko Edward Ellison toku ikoa.
I am the chairperson of the New Zealand Conservation
Authority. Also present online, as you have mentioned, is Wendy
Nelson, deputy chairperson of the authority, and
authority member Paul Nursts. We will each present separate
components of our submission, starting with
myself. The New Zealand Conservation Authority is here to
speak to the proposed Clause 128
of the National Environmental Bill.
The authority was established under the Conservation Act
as an independent statutory body with a range of
functions, primarily acting as an independent
conservation advisor to the Minister and the
Director-General of Conservation.
The authority has a role as an objective advocate on matters of
national significance
and interest in the conservation arena.
Clause 128 of the NEB creates a new
avenue for wildlife permits to be obtained as part of
a natural resource permit,
and this has been ref-framed, as I quote here,
"to reduce the burden on developers and other operators,
we have added, have included a provision in the
NEB that will enable permit authorities
to authorize activities that would otherwise be unlawful under the
Wildlife Act." The stated intent
s- is also to streamline approvals by
removing the need to seek permissions from permit
authorities in the Department of Conservation for the
same activities. However, the bill does not say
how wildlife appro-approvals will be
determined, other than as part of a natural
resource permit. So the decision-making
requirements in Clause 154 to
167 of the bill that apply generally to natural
resource permits would also apply to wildlife
approval aspects of a permit. This means
decisions will be made by the, the permit authority
rather than by the Minister of Conservation
or their delegate. This is a very significant change
that lessens wildlife protections, because the NEB
does not contain the same protective purpose as the
Wildlife Act or a similar treaty
provision. Our submission traverses three
aspects of the clause. One, consequences
for the protection and management of wildlife.
Two, Te Tiriti. And three, underlying
justification for the proposed, proposed change.
I now pass on to Wendy Nelson.
Ko Wendy Nelson taku ingoa. Um, as well as being a member of the
authority, in my day job, I'm a biodiversity scientist and
botanist, and I'm s- addressing the consequences
of the proposed changes for protection and management of
wildlife. The bill does not contain a
wildlife-focused goal, and there's no reference to incorporation of
wildlife permit considerations into the national direction, into
spatial plans and national environment plans.
New Zealand has a really high proportion of threatened and at-risk indigenous
species for which we have national and international
responsibilities. The Wildlife Act protects all native
birds, native reptiles, frogs, bats, some land and
marine invertebrates, and nine marine fish.
It's unlawful to catch or kill protected species unless authorized by the
Director-General of Conservation via a wildlife permit.
And while resource consents may set broad conditions to manage the effects
of activity on indigenous biodiversity, wildlife
permits set much more specific technical requirements and often
specify how are mitigation activities to be undertaken
to appropriately protect wildlife.
It's not clear from Clause 128 if there will be one
authority issuing permits for a location or multiple
agencies, and this leads to the possibility of applicants shopping around,
leading to the processes for permits becoming really muddied and unclear,
both for those seeking and those administering
permits.Regional councils and territorial
authorities don't have wildlife protection functions, and as
such, they don't have the staff with the type of expertise required to
assess wildlife permits, unlike the Department of Conservation.
So there's a real risk that the deficits in knowledge and expertise are
not recognized by councils and decisions are not being made on the
best data and information currently available.
As noted in the Ministry for the Environment briefing paper, placing more
responsibility onto councils to set conditions for wildlife
protection will have major flow-on effects for the councils and also for the
department. Costs for these additional requirements
will be passed on to these local authorities with no apparent additional resource
intended to be allocated. The proposed
Clause one two eight will lead to a loss of coherence
in the protection responsibility for wildlife and will make
protection of threatened species more complex and less
efficient. There's no recognition of the
need for national oversight of threatened species currently protected by the
Wildlife Act. And under the proposed,
one two eight, there's no obligations for reporting or
coordinating information about the decisions and monitoring the
outcomes for New Zealand wildlife.
These are key roles of the Department of Conservation.
Data on wildlife needs to be held in a central and
coordinated system for national benefit and for consistent
decision-making. Now, the Department of Conservation has developed a
framework recently to enable decision-making about species, habitats, and
ecosystems. It's called BioInvest, and this system is enabling
transparency about decisions for priorities and
expenditure, and it's enabling the balancing and weighing of risks and
benefits for biodiversity of specific actions and investments.
There's a complete absence of policy framework to guide how wildlife
protection and decisions will be delivered by this bill.
And there's also been no consultation with the wider New Zealand community on the
proposed changes affecting wildlife.
So in the view of, Conservation Authority, Clause one two eight will lead to
inconsistent decision-making, a lack of clarity for applicants and for
those assessing permits, and loss of protection for
wildlife. I'll hand back now to Edward.
Oh, Edward, you just need to pop your audio on there.
Thank you for the reminder.
Yeah.
Uh, look, we've, we've observed through the reform process the Crown
has consistently failed to engage appropriately with
iwi. The rushed timeframe has cost the Crown the
opportunity to engage meaningfully with iwi on these
significant policy proposals. We note
that the e-expert advisory group recommended that the
bill should retain the Section eight of the RMA, which
requires all persons exercising functions and powers
under the legislation to give effect to the principles of the Treaty
of Waitangi. Including this clause in the purpose of the
bill will ensure that this commitment is recognized throughout the
legislation and not compartmentalized in one
discrete part. We also, also note that some treaty
settlements provide iwi with a role in wildlife management,
including taonga species, and in some instances
requires the Crown to have particular regard to the views
of iwi. As currently drafted, the NEP
is not clear how wildlife approvals will uphold, for
example, redress mechanisms arising from
Treaty settlements. I will now pass on to
Paul Norris.
Uh, Kia ora. Paul Norris
from, from, Relienzed, but
speaking on behalf of the New Zealand Conservation
Authority. I want to talk to the
justification for the proposed changes.
Are consents for wildlife permits actually constraining developers?
The d-data show that Department of Conservation currently gets
involved with a small proportion of resource consent
applications. A very small proportion of
projects that need a resource consent also get a
wildlife permit. In twenty twenty-two, twenty-three,
thirty-one thousand eight hundred and two resource consents were
issued for land use activities and subdivisions.
In this same period, four hundred and sixty-four wildlife permits
commenced. Less than half of these wildlife permits were related to
development, subdivision, and infrastructure
activities.
Over the last five years, only one business has raised concerns with
ministers about duplication between resource consent
and wildlife permits through official
channels. In the
past-- In the recent past, there has been concerns about the
length of time it takes for the Department of Conservation to
process permit applications. However, in the
past twenty-four months, the Department of Conservation has done a great job
reducing the number of p- of outstanding concessions and
permits applications, and greatly speeding up the
processing of, and issuing of new
permits. In the last six months of twenty
twenty-four, fifty-two percent of Wildlife Act authority
permits were completed within seventy days.
In the same period of twenty twenty-five, seventy-five percent were
completed. It is the view of the New Zealand Conservation
AuthorityTo place clear time expectations on the
department to ensure efficient and timely turnarounds on
applications for the wildlife permits could be achieved.
We believe a 60-day working frame would be sufficient,
leaving the wildlife permit, permitting with the Department of
Conservation, the organization that holds the expertise for our
country.
This approach, with the Department of Conservation being
time-bound, would certainly lead to a better outcome for our
wildlife, and also keep the skill set within the
department that has exity- expertise to make
these decisions around wildlife permits.
In summary, the New Zealand Conservation Authority does not
support Clause 128 in the Natural Environment
Bill. We consider that it would be...
It would result a piecemeal decision-making.
The decisions are likely to be inconsistent across the country,
with decisions subject to the provisions of different natural environment
plans and concerns of the different regional
councils. Fragmented and inconsistent
management is not appropriate for threatened and at-risk
species which are categorized as such at a national
scale. The Wildlife Act most
certainly needs to be re- revised, but injecting this clause
to the Natural Environment Bill is not going to meet
either the stated intent of reducing the burden for developers
and other operators, and is certainly not going to result in
protection of our wildlife.
The Crown has consistently failed to engage appropriately with iwi.
The rushed timeframe has cost the Crown the opportunity to engage
meaningfully with iwi on this s- significant
policy proposals. The process to develop
the Natural Environment Bill and Planning Bill has to date not
reflected the partnership afforded within Te Tiriti, and does
not meet even reasonable expectations.
I'd like to thank the panel now for taking the time to hear the New Zealand
Conservation Authority's submission.
Thank you.
Well, thank you
all, Paul, Wendy, and Edward. Look, we will go to, Georgie
Dancy first.
Kia ora, thank you for the submission.
Um, you talked about the, wildlife
approval permits being made by the permit authority instead of the Minister of
Conservation. Uh, my question is whether,
in your view, the continuation of the
minister making those decisions is the right
way moving forward for those wildlife, permits, or if
there is something else that you think would work better as an
alternative.
I, I think, our submission states and the e- evidence we've
given today supports the continuation of the
principal authority resting with the minister, which is, of course,
delegated to the, Conservation Department.
It brings that national consistency framework and
focuses particularly enables the,
application of that, function to a- be
applied in the way that the, the Wildlife Act is
intended, to protect wildlife.
Thank you. Look, we'll move to Lan Pham now for a
question.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for that submission.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your comments around,
making really clear that the Natural Built Environment,
sorry, the Natural Environment Bill, does
not have the same protective purpose as the Wildlife
Act. And, is your
interpretation
that, I guess, if these Wildlife Act
decisions are made under these bills, that it would
be essentially more weight given to the no
net loss of biodiversity goal when it comes to
decisions under the Wildlife Act?
And what are the risks with that sort of no net
loss concept, if any, when it comes to Wildlife Act
decisions?
Well, kia ora. I think you've summarized it well there.
I think the
NEB is about use and development of resources
following on principally from the RMA,
and it does have that no net loss, whereas the Wildlife
Act is about protecting and protecting our
endangered as well as wider wildlife values.
So that there are two distinct,
ways that they function. Look, it is, it is a risk to us.
It's going to
be an... cause an erosion, really, in, in the, the protection of
those important wildlife,
values. Taonga species that we have that we need
to be conscious of. Thank you.
We'll take one last question from
Priyanka.
Uh, thank you. Um, thanks for the stats that you've shared.
I found that really interesting, particularly the fact that just one person,
has sort of raised the concerns about the duplication of
permits.
Do you have a view on what problem this change is
trying to fix?
We do. I'll let Paul answer that one.
I
simply, I think they're looking for a problem where there isn't a problem.
Um, the, the, the issue I see, and I'm, I guess,
talking a little bit as an operator as well on the Department of Conservation and
other areas. We're a large tourism company.
Um, I, I believe, and we believe that,
that there are good rigorous processes in place.
Um, I think by making the department a little bit more time-bound in making
decisions in the context of a wildlife permit, which would
sit alongside a resource consent as it currently does, is
probably some of thepotential frustration that, is
played out, through media circles.
Um, but I think, just through those stats you'll, you'll see the department
has made quite a step change in the timeliness of,
going through, process approvals and/or making
decision-makings around consents, wildlife permits, et cetera.
So again, I personally believe a lot of the frustration that we
might hear is maybe passed on, maybe based on things that happened in the
f- in the past, but not in the recent times where there's been
significant improvement by the department.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much for your
submission today. A really thorough submission and, some
valid points there, so we appreciate your time, all three of you,
so thank you.
Thank you.
Kia ora.
So, we now welcome our next submitter, which
is Te Āti Awa ki Whakarongotai
Charitable Trust, and Richard Evans, I believe,
is joining us.
Allow. Oh.
Allow.
Kia ora, just one moment. It's Helena Baker.
Oh, Helena. Oh, there we go. We can see you.
I'm go-
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, we'll hand it over to you. You've got 20 minutes with us, so, take your
submission as read, and then we'll open up for questions, but if you talk us
through the main points.
Kia ora. Kua rere atu au i te motu tere o
Kapiti, ki Tararua te pae maunga. Ka tau mai ki
Tararua, e rere ana mai ngā ia o
Waikanae, ka whati mai ngā ngaru ki uta.
Tū mai rā taku rangatira, te kākā kura o
Whakarongotai. Ko Whakarongotai e here nei
i ōku raukura, Te Āti Awa, Ngāti Toa
Rangatira me Ngāti Raukawa, ō kupito
whakarei. E mihi ana
ki ngā mema o te komiti taiao e huihui
mai nei ki te whakarongo ki ngā tuku
kōrero. Ko wai au? Ko Helena Gerritsen Parata
tōku ingoa whānau. Ko au te tumuaki o
Te Āti Awa ki Whakarongotai Charitable Trust.
Ko Whakarongotai te manawa o tō mātou iwi, ko
ngā tai e kōrero tonu ana ki a mātou,
ngā tai tuku iho e hono ana i ngā
tūpuna ki ngā uri whakatupu.
For our iwi, the tides are an enduring
metaphor. They remind us that change is
constant, but wise navigation requires
patience, balance and the ability to read the
currents of the taiao. It is from this
perspective that Te Āti Awa ki Whakarongotai
offers our whakaaro on the proposed planning and natural
environmental bill,
bills. I first want to talk
about a relationship with place. I want to
begin with a personal memory that reflects how our
relationship with lis- this landscape is learned and carried
across generations.
When we were children, we would climb the sand dunes at Waikanae
beach with our mother, Ria Te Uwira
Parata. When we reached the top of the sand dunes, she would
instruct us to extend our arms as wide as possible,
raise them towards Tutere-a-Moana, the highest peak on Kapiti
Island, and then bring them back to our hearts.
She would say, "Stretch your arms to the horizon
and embrace the land, the sea and Kapiti.
Let the whenua and the moana hold you."
That simple act taught us something very
profound. The whenua and the moana hold
us, and in return, we have a responsibility to
protect them. Kaitiakitanga is not
theoretical, it is something we
inherit. Place-based knowledge and diverse
iwi perspectives throughout the Kapiti Coast, iwi
maintain distinct relationships with the shared
landscape, especially when we look out
towards Kapiti Island.
Our whanaunga of Ngāti Raukawa ki te Tonga, represented by Ngā Hapu
o Ōtaki, look towards the southern end of the island
and the environmental systems that shape their whenua.
Their relationship with the environment is guided by the settled weather patterns
created by the Kapiti Island effect, they get more sunshine hours than
anyone else, and by the alluvial plains of the Ōtaki
River, the gravels, silts and fertile soils, soils
that sustain their whenua. Our whanaunga Ngāti Toa Rangatira
look at the northern side of Kapiti, and their deep connection to
Raukawa Moana shows in the ecosystems they support, that
support places as Te Awarua o Porirua, Porirua
Harbour, and the surrounding urban rohe.
These waters continue to shape who they are, the
responsibilities they carry, and the way they express their
mana motuhake. For Te Āti Awa ki
Whakarongotai, our perspective is shaped by our clear,
unobstructed view of Kapiti Island, the long sandy beaches of
Paraparaumu and Waikanae, and our estuaries and
coastline, and the waters that move through our rohe.
Each iwi sees the same island and
sea differently. Each holds knowledge shaped by
generations of living in relationship with that place.
That's why place-based decisions are
important. Environmental stewardship cannot be understood
solely from a national perspective.
It must also be formed, informed by the knowledge of those
who-Who has long-standing relationships with the land and the
waters of the, that particular
place.
I also want to talk about partnership, and particularly with local
government. Over many years, Te Āti Awa ki
Whakarongotai has worked deliberately to build
enduring partnerships with Kāpiti Coast District Council and Greater
Wellington Regional Council. These partnerships have not been
based on convenience or personality.
They have been built through sustained effort, trust, and a
commitment to protecting the taiao of our rohe.
Together, we have progressed beyond simple consultation towards a more
substantive partnership, one that is
well-planned, accountable, and gives practical effect to
Te, to Te Tiriti o Waitangi. Through this
relationship, we have worked to ensure the local knowledge, iwi
responsibility, and community aspirations inform environmental
decision-making. These types of
partnerships take time. Like
the tide shaping the shoreline, they develop through
patience, trust, and repeated
engagement.
Another issue I want to speak to is environmental
limits, the notion of having strong
guardrails for the taiao. I want to
emphasize how critical it is
for us to have strong, enforceable environmental
limits. As Tina Porao in an earlier submission
describes, these limits act as essential guardrails that
uphold and protect the taiao, ensuring our natural
systems are not pushed beyond their ability to sustain
life. Te Āti Awa is not opposed
to economic development or business activity.
Development has always been part of how communities
thrive. However, development must
occur within clear environmental boundaries and ensure the
long-term sustainability of the whenua, the waters,
and the people who depend on them. Environmental
limits provide certainty. They ensure that decisions
made today do not compromise the wellbeing of
future
generations.
Our concern is also around the removal of Part
Two and the Treaty principles. Our concern is,
is that the proposed removal of Part Two of the Resource Management Act,
including the Treaty principles contained in Section six, seven,
and eight, risks weaking-- weakening the legislative anchors
that have supported iwi participation in environmental
decision-making. These, those provisions have not been
barriers. They have acted as foundational
principles ensuring the Treaty relationships and
responsibilities of mana whenua remain visible within
environmental law. Without those anchors, the space for
partnership becomes fragile.
I also believe that there is a wider narrative and
rhetoric around
that needs to be addressed. Alongside these legislative
changes, we have also observed a wider narrative
aw-- emerging in public discourse.
At times, the narrative suggests that recognizing iwi relationships with
land and water creates unnecessary barriers to development
or that Treaty partnerships represent preferential
treatment.
At-- For iwi such as Te Āti
Awa ki Whakarongotai these messages
are deeply concerning.
They risk reinforcing the idea that tangata whenua are
obstacles to progress rather than recognizing the
constitutional relationship affirmed through Te Tiriti
o Waitangi. Recent policy debates have included
moves to cut or eliminate explicit, explicit Te
Tiriti references in law and public politic--
in, in laws and public bodies. Taken together,
these shifts raise important questions about whether the Treaty partnership is
being strengthened or grad-or gradually moved to the
margins of public decision-making.
We are also concerned by a proposal that seeks to
fast-track environmental decisions by
concentrating discretion with ministers, potentially
without meaningful involvement from local councils or mana
whenua. When environmental
decisions making is accelerated without adequate
local participation, the knowledge and relationship
s-set su-sustains good environmental stewardship
risks being overlooked. This reminds me of a really
well-known puorako, one that you would remember from your
primary school days, Te Waka o Rata.
This story begins with Rata entering the forest
with the desire to build the best waka that anybody has
ever seen. He cuts down a great
tree,
but he does not acknowledge Tane or the
manu and ngā manu that live in those trees, the
guardians of the forest. When he returns the next day to get on
with the building of that beautiful waka, the
tree has been restored. Now, he just doesn't do this
once. He does this many times, and each time
he's tried to take a tree without recognizing the relationships within the
forest, the ngā here restored
itself.
Only when Rata approached the forest with humility and
respect was he able to
proceed.The lesson of this pūrākau
is clear. When we move too quickly
and fail to recognize the relationships that sustain the natural world,
imbalance follows.
A huge concern that has cut us to the very
core of who we are
is the impacts that this, these changes could have
on Treaty settlements. Te Āti Awa ki
Whakarongotai are also deeply concerned about potential
impacts this legislation may have on existing and future
Treaty settlements. The bills indicate
that settlement provisions may be adjusted so they have effect
only to the greatest extent possible within the new
framework. This wording raises
serious concern. Treaty settlements represent carefully
negotia- negotiated agreements between iwi and the
Crown. They are intended to provide certainty
and a durable foundation for the future.
If legislative reforms effectivel- effectively reduces the
strength of, of settlement
provisions, then the integrity of those agreements is placed
at risk.
For iwi such as Te Āti Awa who remain pre-settlement,
this raises an even more fundamental question.
If existing settlement can be retrospectively diluted through
subsequent legislation, what confidence can iwi have that
future settlements will be durab- durable or
meaningful?
Put sim- simply, if the bar is lowered for settlement across the
rohe, that raises serious questions about fairness,
good faith, and the Crown's ongoing commitment to
honoring its Treaty obligations.
Whakarongo. Whakarongo ki ngā tai e
kōrero ana. Listen to the
tides. The tides speak to us all.
They move with rhythm, balance, and respect for the natural
world. If we are to design a planning system that
truly protects the taiao and serves future
generations, we too must take the time to listen to the
land, to the waters, and to the people whose whakapapa
binds them to this place. The Resource Management Act
has not been perfect, but it has provided the framework through which
genuine local government re- relationships have slowly developed.
Our concern is that these bills risk dismantling
that framework without providing a clear pathway
forward. For Te Āti Awa ki
Whakarongotai, the responsibility remains
clear. Our decisions must be tipuna
inspired
and mokopuna focused. Te Āti Awa ki
Whakarongotai recommends that the committee retain the foundational
principles currently contained in Part 2 of the RMA,
including recognition of Māori relationships with ancestral lands,
waters, and the principles of Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
Ensure that the new system enables meaningful participation of
all iwi and hapū, including pre-settlement
groups.
Pro- protect the integrity of existing and future
settlements, ensuring they are not weakened through
subsequent legislative reform. Nō
reira, tēnā koutou, tēnā
koutou, tēnā koutou
katoa.
Kia ora. Thank you very much for that very passionate,
submission and of course, bringing us back to nature and the land and
Waikanae Beach. Um, look, we've got a couple of questions.
We'll go first to Lan Pham.
Oh, tēnā koe, Whaea. Thank you so much for your submission.
Kia ora.
I just wanted to ask about timeframes,
because, you know, you make-- You and many others have made so
many helpful suggestions about how this b-
these bills might be able to change, to be changed to
actually, particularly uphold Māori
rights and interests in the system, but also for te
taiao. Do you think it is
possible
if this committee do, you know, recommend that, for
example, all that you've recommended is actually brought through in the bill?
Do you think it's possible for this bill, or these two bills rather,
to be workable? Or do you think actually
to, I guess, embed all the changes
that everyone are asking for because they're so sort of, they
pull at the whole structure of the bill.
Do you think we do need more time to get this right?
Uh, that's the, the big, the big answer for me is that yes,
you do need to take time to do this. Rushing this through will
be, its greatest enemy, in my
opinion. Um, and I know people are desperate to
get things going and move the economy on and those sorts of
things, but this is too important.
So we need the right minds and thinking
in the development of either the new bills to
incorporate what we, what we need or to
reshape. Um, and I know that there's some wonderful
people in this country who could do that, given some time.
Doesn't have to take forever. None of us have to wait, wait around for that.
But at least a year. At least a
year. Kia ora. Just
turning to my people. Is there anything else?
No, I've got the thumbs up with that one.
Thank you. And Steve Abel has, the last question actually, 'cause
we've nearly met time, so thank you.
Thank you . Kia ora. Thank you so much for your excellent
submission. And, in your section on regulatory
relief, you point out the disproportionate emp- emphasis on private property
rights. Uh, now, some of us might challenge whether private property
rights, should be given any sort of emphasis in a, a bill
that purportedly is designed to protect, te taiao.
But you point out in the framework it provides no compensation for harm
to waterways, biodiversity or cultural
values. If there was to be a
recognition of private property rights, as the bill currently plans to do, do you
think it's reasonable that there should therefore also be a recognition of harm
done to the commons, by private
exploitation of those commons? Um, and could you expand on that,
reflection, please?
Ah, I need someone to come and, respond,
if that's all right, who, who, who has a little bit more notion around
that. But from my own perspective,
I agree totally with you. There's been no compensation for the harm
to the waterways. And who's sticking up for them?
Mm.
Iwi usually. Um-
Mm
... and the, the, the important thing for me is that we need to be all
in there together protecting our environment, every single New
Zealander. Um, is there anything else anyone else wants to add?
You've got that, I think.
Yeah, no, that's, they said I've got it there.
It's up to us all to protect our environment,
and so that means, for me, the protection of
personal... I always think of something
that I've done my whole life. If I'm talking about personal property
and I'm buying anything, buyer beware.
Make sure you've looked at what you're buying very, very carefully,
and, and in your ideas of purchasing, make
sure that you've considered the environment that you're purchasing
in.
Thank you.
I hope that's it. Thanks. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you for your submission today.
Appreciate your time and your insights, so thank
you.
Ngā mihi nui. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
So now we welcome to the committee our next submitter, and
the Environmental Law Initiative.
And we can see you there. Welcome to the committee this
afternoon. Uh, you have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over
to both of you to talk us through your
submission.
Oh.
Oh, kia ora koutou.
There we go.
Can you see my colleague Anna?
Yes, so I can see Anna and Akarni.
Yeah, okay. I'll let Anna start.
Brilliant. Thank you.
Oh, you've just, can't hear you there,
Anna.
Mm.
Kia ora?
Yes, there we go. We've got sound.
Phew. Um, kia ora. Tēnā
koutou katoa. Ngā mihi nui for the opportunity to speak
here on behalf of Environmental Law Initiative today.
Um, my name is Anna Sintony. I'm a senior researcher at
ELI, and, also here online we've got Akarni
Sandham, who's a senior legal advisor at ELI.
So ELI is a small NGO based in Wellington.
Um, it relies on the law to take action to protect our natural
environment, and ELI supports effective, well-implemented
laws which protect our natural environment.
We've got particular interest in ongoing litigation
on oceans, fresh water and climate change issues at the
moment. Um, and our submission touches on
some of those. Um,
so I'm gonna start today with a overview
of, some overview comments, and then I'll hand over to
Akarni,
to pick up on some of the substantive submissions, and then,
I will discuss some of the more detailed aspects of ELI's
submission on implementation.
Um, so firstly to, again, thank the
committee for the opportunity to submit on the bills.
However, it, in doing so, we also want to point out
that
we have, real concerns that the scale of the importance of these
laws has not been reflected in the process of their
development to date. These bills are the most
important, inv- laws of our
generation, and form a foundation of
Aotearoa New Zealand's health and wellbeing, the
economy, the infrastructure, housing, climate resilience and
response, our natural taonga, and they importantly will
determine the opportunity that our future generations will also have in
relation to those things. ELI's view is
that for a matter of this kind of magnitude and importance,
and that is reflected in the size and complexity of the bills that
we've got before us, this demands a more
extended approach to public consultation.
And, that early exposure in developing
these laws would've been beneficial.
But in lieu of this, we think that more public input, more
agency work, more expert analysis is needed
after the select committee process, and certainly before the
report back. Um, and we think the time for the report
back should be extended for that reason.
Um, so for ex- one example I'll give as a
result of the le- sort of,
lack of, public input that's apparent at this
stage, is one of the things we've heard a lot from
parties throughout, um-The select committee
process is about the de-death of definitions within the
bills. So as we've heard, these
definitions are critical to the implementation of the law
and will be open to interpretation by the courts and also,
you know, that has potential, unintended
consequences. Um, we've heard that, but at this
stage, those definitions are also really important because they inform
submitters as to the intent of the proposals.
And so it's one thing for submitters to point out now that there's
gonna be these administrative implications when the law is enforced.
But at this stage, we also, with these terms that lack
definition, as, as submitters don't
have a real opportunity to really scrutinize what the law
is going to mean and be able to feed back on that into the process.
So that means there could be some surprises once these terms are
defined and that haven't been worked through yet.
So again, it's just reiterating the point that,
ELI submitted on that we need more time and input for
public scrutiny on this.
Um, and I'll hand over to Akane now on
some more substantive points.
Right. Kia ora. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Um, thank you also for the op-opportunity to speak today.
Um, following on from what my colleague Anna has just said, I'd
just like to start by referring to the many submitters that we've seen, their
presentations or their submissions, and on
over the last couple of weeks, and, raise that
they have, brought up several similar concerns to what we
have, in our written submission, particularly, particularly around,
limits, compensation for, landowners, for
regulation, lack of standing, and other
matters. Um, and we, ask that you pay particular
attention to, those submitters and those points,
that are si-similar to ours. Um, by no means, are all the
points that we're covering today everything we have to say, as you'll be aware
from our written submission. Uh, but we do have three or four, key
topics that we'd like to talk to, and just really highlight given
our limited time. Um, so
the points that we'd like to talk to are q- about environmental limits,
minimum standards for water quality, accountability and
compliance, and finally about wildlife permits.
Uh, so first I'd like to just quickly talk a little bit about environmental
limits and then I'll hand back over to Anna.
Um, so in terms of environmental limits, and I'm aware there's
been, numerous submitters who have spoken to,
the issues of environmental limits and similar concerns,
to what we have in our written submission.
Um, in particular, I refer to WWF New
Zealand, and the significant
ana-ana-analysis that has been provided in Environmental Defense
Society's, submission,
too. Um,
so in terms of environmental limits, ELI welcomes the use of the concept of
environmental limits in the Natural Environment Bill.
Um, however, we are concerned about the ability, for the
provisions around these limits to actually provide, for environmental
protection, and we believe that these provisions have to,
change, to become stronger. Um,
sp-uh, specifically, our concerns are about Clause 11 of the NEB
and how it provides for the protection of environmental limits alongside goals.
Um, and I h- I've seen that this has been, yeah, something that has been brought up
by other submitters as well. Um, so we consider that
this, protection for environmental limits is inadequate,
particularly the requirement to merely seek to
achieve, these goals is weak, and inconsistent with
the ideas that these limits would actually function to limit, environmental
harm. Uh, further, the lack of a clear
hierarchy between, the goals provided also means that the
protection of limits is to be weighed up against, competing
goals, and this provides inadequate protection for, the
limits. Uh
further, we consider that the ability for councils to essentially lower,
an ecosystem health limit as long as they provide a justification
report, as provided in Clause 51 of the
NEB, it does not ho-uphold the level of protections,
required, for said limits. Uh, therefore, we,
refer to our written submission on these points, and
request that the committee, considers redrafting these provisions,
to ensure that anyone who exercises a function or duty under the
Act, is required to ensure that environmental limits are not
exceeded, and that there is also no ability
to weaken these limits as well. Um,
I'll pass over to Anna, who's going to talk about, minimum standards for water
quality next.
Kia ora. Uh, the, a lack of any
provisions that are analogous to Section 70 and 107
in the RMA is a severe regression in
environmental protection for water quality.
These provisions do have a historic context, and they've applied
for all di-discharges that end up in water throughout the tenure of the RMA.
So the refusal-- the, the removal of,
the definitive descriptors of minimum
standards for water quality and replacing these with the more
non-statutory, more porous limits that councils will
be, implementing means
allowing more pollution than, councils allowing more
pollution than they have ever, been enabled to do so under
the RMA. Um, environmental limit
setting in the-In the Natural Environment Act, we
don't consider to be a replacement for those minimum standards.
We've heard that from Akane that those
limits, are flexible and
porous, but
they also don't clearly connect to the mechanisms through which
councils are actually empowered to enable pollution.
So those being resource caps or the action plans or
any kind of potential controls that are implemented under an action
plan, they don't link really in a clear
way to the limits. Councils only use limits to inform their
caps or in action plans these relate to
limits. So it's really unclear how those limits are going to
work in relation to water quality, we- where the
primary, core restriction that is
the starting point is that a person can't pollute unless they've been
expr- expressly allowed to do so,
through a rule or a permit or,
otherwise. So we,
are really concerned that
the loss of the existing minimum standards in Section
seventy and one oh seven, is not,
that gap is not filled by, the
new, environmental limits. And there's
also a point I want to add that's not in our written submission about the
amended wording in relation to those core restrictions on
discharges in Clause twenty-one.
Um, we're no longer in the proposal using the same language that
Section, Section fifteen of the RMA used for
discharges to land
of, a contaminant that may enter water.
So, so this is new wording, and so
it's new wording at the most core pro- prohibition on pollution, and
that will need to be interpreted by the courts.
And, because it's a core,
restriction on pollution from which all,
all, polluting discharges need to then be allowed,
a lot of things hang off it. So i- it's a really, it's a
really big thing to change, and
to need to be interpreted by the courts.
So I think there needs to be more analysis as to what that
means, in the next stage for this,
work. Um,
yeah, essentially,
overall, we're concerned that under this new regime,
we're gonna see more pollution that keeps entering our
hydrological systems at what we already know is
unsustainable rates and potentially at higher levels than before
because we don't have those minimum standards or bottom lines that we've had in the
RMA before. Um, moving on
to the issue of implementation, and
accountability. One of the key criticisms in the
RMA has been, that it's been a failure of
implementation. But we wanna see for this,
law that
the core provisions for implementation ensure that the environment and the system
are being well monitored and that achieving what it's setting out to
achieve, that we have good levels of compliance, which is being
monitored for and enforced, and that the system is actually
achieving--
if it's not actually achieving what it's set out to achieve, that the responsible
agencies are sufficiently informed to enable them to take the
action needed. So ELI does support building on
the RMA provisions, which is what's being done here.
But our concern is that we don't think that the way that those
provisions are being built on is actually an improvement that brings things
forward. And we think that, in fact, some of the
aspects of the proposal are likely to result in
things going backwards in terms of implementation.
Um, and that's because the experience has been under the RMA that
resource-constrained councils will exercise their
discretion, in relation to
information gathering and monitoring.
To the extent that it's available to them, they're gonna need to minim-
always be minimizing their cost burden of monitoring w- work, and the more
discretion they have in the fulfillment of those statutory duties, the more that
they can, minimize that cost burden
a- as, as they desire
and, to the-- at the expense of monitoring that's thorough
and fit for purpose. So we think the
law needs to be much more, or needs to be abundantly clear that the scope
and the
ex- extent of the information gathering and monitoring and action that falls out of
that is really specified for councils to make
sure that they're undertaking their duties in that area.
Um, and we think
there are two kind of weaknesses that lead to
that not being specified. One is the core weaknesses and
the purpose provision that we've heard from
Akane, and from many other submiss-
submitters, that without a kind of outcomes-based purpose
clause, the implementation of the system misses like a key
touchstone from which you can measure success
against. And so if you can't
define what success looks like, you, you can't define the scope as to what
councils need to be measuring in their monitoring duties.
Um,
and now the way that councils' functions are now
defined in the proposal is that they let any kind of,
expectation or standard, like previously
maintenance and enhancements of water quality, against which
theirMonitoring was to,
serve, so the monitoring is not designed to serve a kind of
normative function anymore. So we, we wanna see the system
connect those monitoring and information gathering provisions that are,
for example, in 227, I think, of the
NEB, through to the kinda outcomes that the
system's seeking to achieve. And then the second
characteristic which we think makes implementation more difficult
under this new system is a lack of connection between the monitoring
responsibilities in
227 of the NEB. It's also, I think it's 186
of the Planning Act. There's a lack of connection,
between those responsibilities and the tools that councils have for actually
managing the resources.
Um, in the submission we talked about an example of council
action plans which have a kind of reflexive mechanism in them
there where a council needs to be satisfied
that, um... before the... satisfied that
other non-regulatory matters aren't sufficient before they use
controls on land use or input controls.
Um, but monitoring needs to be sufficient to inform
that kind of statutory test, and monitoring
needs to be provided for or required at a level that's
sufficient to achieve to inform that.
Um, and so we think the connection should be made between those kinds of tools,
the resource caps,
the action plans,
through to the monitoring provisions and the
implementation provisions. And
that's, that's the kind of,
overarching, thing
of the, the, our con- the description of our concerns
of, in relation to implementation.
But I think, yeah, I can, um... I don't know how we're doing for time.
I can keep going.
Yeah, Anna, we are, we are nearly at time, so-
Okay
... look, we have got a couple of questions.
So, we'll just take a question from
Lam.
Kia ora koutou. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I just wanted to ask about the,
timeframes with implementation and, I
guess, your
experience with councils and council resources so
far, because as far as I understand it,
councils, for example, can only use
regulatory measures in their plans
once they have made an assessment that voluntary measures
won't be enough. And a lot of submitters have raised
this as essentially too high of a bar
that councils, you know, may not be able to
ever fully explore whether voluntary measures could meet the standards before
putting in regulation. What do you think the risks might be,
with that from your point of view?
I think the risks with that are that,
we- we've kind of got the cart before the horse.
Um,
we, have a system that
requires, for,
for example, in relation to water quality, rule ba-
based enablement or permits, but we don't have
the,
w- we don't have the monitoring data, and we don't have
the decision-making,
like, lined up in the right sequence to enable
the precautionary kind of decisions
that need to be made on those, you know, when a
rule enables,
pollution, for example, or a, a permit enables that
pollution, there'll be a pressure to,
continue until we have all the right,
you know, until a council can satisfy itself that,
those, that high
threshold, that non-regulatory methods
aren't sufficient. So, you know, it's really putting the cart before the horse.
It should be the other way around. We should be taking a more precautionary appra-
actually a precautionary approach, that
waits,
to determine, you know, where that, where that,
allocative capacity lies before we enable
more discharges.
Look, thank you very much, Anna, and Ákane.
We really appreciate your time today.
We have, met time, and we, have other submitters waiting,
but, we appreciate your submission and your insights
today, so thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you for the time.
So we now welcome through our next submitter for today, which is
Infrastructure New Zealand, and we can see you
there, Nic.
Uh, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Um, you've got 20 minutes with us, so we will hand over to
you to talk us through your submission, and then we'll open up for questions.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Kia ora koutou.
Um, Nic Leggett is my name. I'm the chief executive of Infrastructure New
Zealand, and, with me is Danielle, Anuzza, who is
our policy manager. Um, Infrastructure New Zealand is
the peak membership body, representing the infrastructure
sector, not just those who build infrastructure, but also those who
own, plan, and, and, and
deliver, across, you know, many different
sectors. Um, so our membership includes over 150
organizations and, who collectively employ about
150,000 people, across the country.
So we support the reforms to the resource management
systemIt's overdue, it's needed, and the infrastructure
sector nee- needs legislation that is going to be
enduring. And so we are strongly supportive of, of
moving forward with these reforms, but also recognizing
that success will depend on whether the legislation
creates a, a coherent system that enables infrastructure
delivery while achieving strong environmental
outcomes. So for infrastructure, getting the
RMA right, is one part of a, a
wider system change. In preparing the submission,
we worked across our industry and those different sectors that I've
mentioned. Um, we workshopped this in, Auckland, Wellington, and
Christchurch. We spoke with over 100 stakeholders, people who
own infrastructure, utilities,
contractors, engineering consultants, and public sector
agencies, including local government.
The submission, the submission we provided
reflects, concerns that were, were consistently raised.
Um, and we wanna take a moment just to bring some of those
perspectives to you all today. The central message we
heard from across the infrastructure industry is that
infrastructure delivery depends on long-term certainty,
and really importantly, a system that is
predictable. And the industry told us that we need that
system to be clear and predictable so they can invest,
plan, and deliver with confidence.
And when you look at New Zealand's key infrastructure
challenges, we think about value for money, the, the, the, the
value we get from every dollar spent.
Um, there are some baked in reasons for that if we think about
geography and geology, but actually
certainty, being able to plan with certainty,
be, be able to, be-- have confidence in, in,
a, a regime that consents is really, really
important to, giving businesses the ability to plan
ahead and to invest in people and in, in many cases, machinery.
So it's, it's-- this is really, this is a vital shift in the
system, I think to, to allow greater
clarity, not just for the infrastructure industry, but actually but for the
country as a whole. And for the system to be effective, the
reform needs to provide, in our view, three key
things. That clear alignment between environmental
protection and development outcomes, a stable and
durable national direction, and spatial
plans that are grounded in the practical realities of infrastructure
delivery. Um, and that means the right kind of corridor planning, a
focus on where people live, but also where they're going to work.
And we're not gonna take the committee through our submission, but, we
do, want to sort of discuss those three points in a, in a little bit
more detail. So I'll ask Danielle to, to, talk about the-
Yeah
... the alignment between the two bills.
Yeah. Kia ora koutou. Um, I'll speak about the alignment between the two bills and
national direction before passing back over to Nic.
Um, so while we understand the intent between the two bill framework, we
understand what the planning bill is there for, what the environment bill is there
for, and the policy logic makes a lot of sense for us.
What we've heard in our engagements with our stakeholders is that there is just
some general uneasiness just about how the two bills are gonna operate
together. And while we recognize that there is an intention to kind
of reconcile or kinda set how those two things are gonna work
together in, national direction, that's still kind of the
key message we've heard. Um, specifically, our
stakeholders highlighted a few areas where environmental systems are already
under pressure. So we're kind of talking now about, you know, balancing,
development of environmental limits as is currently in the goals.
Um, some examples they gave us are, you know, freshwater catchments in Canterbury
and the Waikato are already operating close to nutrient limits.
Urban harbors in Auckland and Tauranga are already facing ongoing challenges from
sediment and stormwater contamination.
And our coastal communities are increasingly responding to flooding and sea
level rise. So at the same time, what our stakeholders have
highlighted is that many of those solutions actually rely on
infrastructure. So improving freshwater quality requires wastewater and
stormwater upgrades. Improving harbor health, requires investment in
urban stormwater and infrastructure.
And adapting to climate risks requires flood protection and resilient
infrastructure networks. So for us, simply working
within environmental limits
is, is important, but the role of infrastructure-- but the role infrastructure
plays, plays in achieving these environmental limits really need to be
explicitly recognized. Um, for example, we believe the national policy
statement on infrastructure, infrastructure articulates this pretty well,
where it, gets decision-makers to recognize its benefits, like
providing for the social, cultural, and economic wellbeing of present and future
generations, and the role infrastructure plays in helping protect and restore the
natural environment. Um, so we do think that these sentiments
need to be recognized upfront through the goals rather than leaving it to be
reconciled by different ministers and different governments down the line.
So for us, it's really about making sure that the key role of infrastructure is in
the system, and it's quite clear, so that we can make sure we're balancing
those upfront. Um, for the second part, which
is about ensuring stability and national direction,
obviously, under the new system, national direction will play a much more
central role, in shaping spatial planning, environmental limits,
and consenting pathways. Um, and at the same time, we do wanna
point out that the bills do give significant discretion to ministers through
national direction. Um, and like I said, a lot of the trade-offs between
environmental outcomes and development, which aren't resolved as yet, will
ultimately be managed through national direction.
Um, so for us and what we've heard from our members, given the scale of that
influence, it becomes even more important that national direction operates
within a stable and predictable frameworkUm, because
infrastructure planning, operates over long-term horizons,
often 10 to 30 years, frequent and reactive changes to
national direction can cause significant uncertainty for projects that are already
in planning and delivery. Um, as an example, our stakeholders pointed to
changes to national policies, to national policy statement on urban
development, which has required, infrastructure providers to
revisit long-term planning assumptions.
Um, so because of the influence national direction has across the
system, what the sector is really looking for is stability in the
strategic direction. So we're, you know, kind of calling a national,
direction as a strategic direction side of it, while still allowing technical
improvements to occur over time through the national standards.
So we're not saying the system can't evolve, but we believe that any
amendments to national direction need to be limited to where there's a com-- a
clear and compelling reason. So for example, in our submission, we
raised, you know, anything where there, where there is scientific...
significant new scientific evidence, a failure to achieve stated
environmental or development outcomes or major changes in national targets.
Um, what we're really looking for is a reason for change and transparency and
accountability around that change.
So at a minimum, what we've heard from our stakeholders is that there should be a
requirement for the minister to clearly explain why a change to national direction
is necessary and support this with evidence and perhaps a regulatory impact
statement. Um, and on the other side, we've actually heard
more, like requests from our stakeholders to have even more
scrutiny around it, whether that's through parliament, a select committee process,
or another form of independent oversight.
Um, and there's, several other jurisdictions internationally that do
this. Uh, so importantly for us, the legislation needs to also
include a clear transition provision or pathway,
and stability periods where changes to national direction happen.
So this, for us, is we just wanna make sure that it doesn't disrupt any
infrastructure projects that are already well advanced in planning or
delivery. Thank you. Nick.
Just if I can talk,
very briefly about regional spatial planning and
the intention, for spatial plans to
better align to land use,
infrastructure and long-term investment decisions.
This is really an important step forward, and it has the
potential, we believe, to improve coordination between
housing, commercial growth, infrastructure provision, and environmental
outcomes. However, the, the current drafting focuses
primarily on the process of preparing plans rather than
ensuring those plans can actually be delivered.
And so for spatial planning to remain credible over that
thirty-year time horizon, they do need to be
grounded in delivery realities. And I know committee members
will, appreciate those realities from woe to go
in terms of dealing with, local government at a regional
level, ensuring, that every major party is involved
in that, and then actually how the, the rubber hits the
road. So in practical terms, that means
identifying, you know, who will deliver key infrastructure, when
it will be delivered, and critically, how it will be
funded. Without that level of clarity, there is a risk
that spatial plans become another one of
those strategic documents that just don't have
clear, a clear pathway for
implementation. So an implementation plan needs to be prepared
along with each spatial plan, setting out delivery
responsibilities, sequencing of major infrastructure
investments, and as I mentioned, those, those
in-indicative funding pathways.
Another issue that was raised by, people that we engage
with across the infrastructure industry relates to who is involved
with spatial planning decisions and when.
So infrastructure providers often find that they're consulted after
key spatial decisions have already been made, rather than being involved
early in shaping those decisions.
To go back to the, the point I was making at the start around,
better value for money, we often find that if more of those
planning parties are engaged early, you get the
innovation and the clarity of planning that allows you to
actually get the best result at the end.
And often, you allow innovation to be, to, to
be driven early into projects. So for
spatial plans to be realistic and deliverable, the right delivery partners
need to be around the table from the beginning, and that includes
infrastructure owners, you know, utilities, central agencies
responsible, responsible for funding and delivering major
infrastructure. Um, early involvement also
helps, ensure that spatial plans reflect real
delivery needs and constraints, as well as sequencing
requirements and investment timelines.
So, I mean, our interest, and I'm sure the interest of the committee, is the
need to move beyond being maps of
lovely intent, but they can become credible plans for
delivery. And that's, I think-- and that's all of our interests.
And that requires that clear direction, about
how they're gonna be implemented and also that early involvement of all the
organizations that are gonna have a part of that.
Yeah. So just in closing, and just to echo what Nick said earlier, Infrastructure
New Zealand does support the direction of the reform.
Um, but like we said, for the system to succeed, we just need to see, clear
alignment between environmental outcomes and infrastructure delivery,
stable policy signals, and planning frameworks that are grounded in
delivery reality. Um, we do think that if the legislation gets these
foundations right, these reforms do have the potential to deliver smarter,
faster, and better infrastructure outcomes for New Zealand.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to present today, and we're happy to take
questions from the, select committee.
No, thank you both for that, great submission,
and all those insights. Look, we'll go to Scott Willis first for a question.
Thank you both. Great submission, really appreciate it.
And, in terms of our deficit in renewable energy
infrastructure, what are your thoughts on the importance of a
bipartisan national energy strategy to provide that gu- guidance
and, and certainty, particularly given our urgent need
to reduce our reliance on the vulnerable fossil fuel supply that we're seeing
now? And, and if I can follow up with a sup on that, I'd appreciate that,
Chair.
We, we would support... I mean, we bang on a lot about
bipartisanship. Um, and Scott, I mean, it, it, it's
a fair question in, in the space that the world finds itself currently.
But
what we find is that there's often too much reaction.
Um, it is about setting these long-term planning,
instruments that will enable us to
build out over time. I mean, I think one of the key restrictions for renewable
energy, has been, planning,
tape that was probably ultimately not put in place to
restrict, but has ended up doing so.
And so, actually, we see this as being,
you know, one way of, of actually unlocking, that
opportunity for, you know, generation over time for this country.
So yeah, we do support it.
And if I could just follow up with-
Yeah, just one sup there, Scott.
Thank you. Um, so in terms of making sure that we are doing,
doing this well in terms of energy, what are your thoughts on local area energy
planning that i- or would involve local government, iwi,
community, and energy sector actors like EDBs and
developers, Transpower, et cetera, in terms of
spatial planning, a, a, a s- very specific part of spatial
planning?
I, I, I think that, that we... It's not something we've considered.
It would be something we, we would be open to if it is within
the sort of jurisdiction of a spatial plan.
I think that what, what we, what, what spatial planning
offers us is the ability to see regions as building
blocks of the country that all lead to, an overall
New Zealand Inc. approach. And if you think about where a
nation plans its generation,
where, where it plans, any of the things that are
nationally important, spatial planning is actually a really good place to start.
So we'd be certainly be open, to that suggestion.
Thank you. Look, we'll move to Grant McCallum now.
Yeah, G'day, Nick. Um, thank you to both of you for your presentation.
Um, just, what have you got a view on, like, really long-term,
core infrastructure in this country, would take the hydro schemes or, or
just big, big pieces of infrastructure.
They've got to go through, seem to go through, A, they have a, they have a, a
time limited consent, which seems to me to be ridiculous.
But w- w- i- is there a better way to approach, reassessing
the, how they're performing, and then having a
reconsenting process, should we be looking at something a bit different for those
critical thing, bits of infrastructure?
So would you be talking about critical infrastructure, or would you be
talking about, like, size, so sort of those large, nationally important sort
of mega projects?
Yeah, either or. I mean, yeah, probably would use the da- the hydro schemes, for
example, right? You know what I mean?
It seems to me ridiculous that we've got to go through a reconsenting process which
costs millions and millions of dollars to what...
And, and, and, you know, what you have a view around that sort of
process. And would there be a better way to check them, check
up on their performance?
I mean, we haven't really contemplated whether there's a better way to do the
reconsenting, although I understand your kind of views on that.
And this is kind of what we were saying about making sure that we're managing those
outcomes up front. Like, for us-
Mm-hmm
... yeah, doing a reconsenting of something that's kind of already agreed to and we
already understand as such should probably not be the way to go.
Surely there's a more, if it's already been assessed previously, I don't see
why you would need to reconsent it again.
Yeah. Yeah. I think the, the question is, would in the permitting aspect of, you
know-
Mm-hmm
... the, the sort of the shift more to permitting here-
Yeah
... officials would be able to advise on that, answers to that question.
Is, is, is there gonna be more allowance for that, you know, w-
will a permitting system allow a sort of a, a, a, a sort of a
greater flexibility in terms of what you're talking about, Grant?
Yeah. I suppose I'd just sup maybe just quickly, Madam Chair, just 'cause, I
mean, y- y- we incur a lot of costs whenever we do this.
Yeah.
And, and in this case, it only only winds up in one place, and that's on power
bills.
Yes. It's the same with all sort of infrastructure where costs are added
through-
Yeah
... through the planning and consenting process. Yeah.
Cool. Th- thanks, guys.
Thank you. Look, I'm, I'm just gonna jump in with a question because you do talk
about in your submission, around climate change
adaptation, obviously resilient
infrastructure is very, very important.
Um, you know, obviously coming from Hawkes Bay, where we've had to rebuild a
lot of our infrastructure here. Um, and your
recommendation is to, in some way, shape, or form, in-
include it in the goals. Um, just wondering if you could elaborate a
little further on that, 'cause it came up with the civil contractors and a few
other, submitters as well. So I was just interested in your take
on that.
Yeah. I guess for us, we just, have looked at the previous legislation.
In there, there already is consideration, on give,
having regard to the effects of climate change.
So for us, we just kind of found it a bit, I don't know if it was,
just missed off as a point, but, like, the fact that it didn't make it into
the Natural Environment bill was a bit of an anomaly for us, which is why we
wanted it raised. Um, like we said earlier, for us, there is kind of a key
theme around here about recognizing the effects, infrastructure
has or the role it plays in, you know, improving our environmental
outcomes. So that kind of goes along the same lines as making sure that we're using
infrastructure, we're considering the effects of climate change when we're making
decisions under the Natural Environment bill.
Um, 'cause I do think those, that's a key thing, that's a key goal that should be
considered by that bill.
And, and was that, and, and you think it should be in the goals, not kind of,
i- in a, u- any other area?
Yeah. Be- And I think we just go back to the fact of how the hierarchy
works. Um, obviously a national direction will be made, to
implement those goals. We just find that if things are left off on that top
bit, it's easy to leave it off down the line.
Obviously legislation will have a long-term horizon.
I mean, it gets interpreted different ways throughout the
years.
You know, thank you. Thank you. And thanks for your submission.
Look, we have met time, we do need to move on.
We've got other submitters waiting.
But I appreciate that, you know, really, really valuable submission.
So thanks for that.
Yeah. Thanks, everyone. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Uh, so we now, move on to our next
submitter, keeping with our themes of energy,
Genesis Energy
Limited.
And we
can see you both there, Alice and Malcolm.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Look, you've got 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you to talk us
through your submission. But do take it as read, and then we'll, of course, we'll
open up the questions.
Uh, kia ora. Thank you very much. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can.
Excellent. Thank you. I just had a few technical problems logging in, so thank
you. Um, my name is Malcolm Johns. I'm the chief executive of Genesis
Energy. Joined here by my colleagues, Alice Barnett,
and Matthew Ritchie. Um, thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to
you today. Obviously, these reforms are broader than just the electricity
sector. Um, but o- they play very heavily into the,
future of New Zealand's energy system and, most notably the electricity
sector. Um, Genesis is broadly supportive of the reforms.
Um, we have s- specific comments that we'll touch on today.
Um, but what we would like to point out is the,
economic and social a- and environmental value of the energy
transition in New Zealand, and in particular, where the sector needs to get
to by 2050, which is what we call the sixty/ninety-five/one hundred
formula. And that is that by 2050, at least 60%
of all of New Zealand's energy needs to come from electricity, at least
95% of that electricity needs to come from renewable sources, and that
electricity needs to be available 100% of the time.
Uh, and that is the focus, we have here at Genesis.
The reforms that are being advanced are critical to our ability to not
only transition the demand side of, electricity to get to that
60%, ele- electrification of New Zealand, which in
today's dollars would save New Zealanders $8 to $10 billion in total energy
costs from moving from fossil fuels to electricity.
Um, but also to get to 95% renewable,
generation. Uh, the building of new generation is
critical, to supplying that growth and demand, and
allowing New Zealand to leverage that competitive advantage it has
in, the dev- in the 20-year head start we have on most other developed
economies in terms of renewable electricity.
Um, so with that, I'm gonna hand over to Alice to speak specifically, to a few
points on our submission. Alice.
Kia ora. Um, so the key thing to point out,
is that Genesis is part of the Electricity Sector Environment Group, who
filed a detailed submission, on the bills, which we support.
Um, and we know that that group is presenting to you later in the week as well.
Um, so today we wanted to emphasize three areas from our Genesis
submission, that we see as significant and in which we have experience and
expertise to offer the committee.
The three areas that we wanted to talk to you today are the specified energy
activities, the existing environment, and activity status.
So firstly, our submission on specified energy activities reflects the need for
all generation to be, existing generation to be provided for in the new
system, including thermal generation at Huntly Power Station.
Um, Huntly Power Station will continue to play a critical role into the future to
firm our highly renewable system.
Um, we have submitted that existing thermal generation should also be included in
the definition of specified energy activities in both bills, as
well as in any goals and policies relating to protecting and maintaining
existing electricity generation.
Uh, for the electricity system, as Malcolm has just said, this transition is not
about just enabling the build of new renewables, but it's also about making sure
the framework does not unintentionally undermine the assets that the country still
relies on for security of supply. Um, so if the system makes it
easier to add new capacity but harder to maintain the existing capacity,
that will keep the lights on in the meantime, that will not support a durable
energy transition. The second part is,
relating to the existing environment.
So one of the real tests about whether this new system is enabling
or, will be whether nationally significant existing infrastructure
can continue to operate, be renewed, and be upgraded with
greater certainty and less friction than we're currently experiencing in the
current system.
The new system needs to prescribe an existing environment that includes the
activity itself. For example, for hydros, that's the taking of water,
discharge, diversion, and damming of water, rather than only the
assets being the physical structures.
And the third point to make today is the activity status for
specified energy activities. Um, an example is the Tekapo Power Scheme
that we've just gone through reconsenting for.
It has a controlled activity status under the RMA, meaning that focus has
always been on the conditions of consent rather than whether consents are
granted or not. And despite this, and despite the scheme being in existence
since the 1950s, the reconsenting process has been long and
uncertain. We submit that the bill should require national
standards to direct that the upgrade, renewal, and repowering of specified
energy activities is permitted under both bills.
Standards can still be applied, but if those are met, then existing generation
should be enabled to continue rather than to follow in the case of the
Tekapo P-... power scheme reconsenting, a long, uncertain, and
costly process. Um, and with those three key points, I'll hand back to
Malcolm.
Which means we are open for questions, Chair, if you'd like.
Brilliant. Brilliant. Thank you very much for that.
Look, we have got a flurry of questions, so we will start with Scott
Willis.
Oh, thank you. Thank you both. Um, I note that you're moving
towards decarbonization, and you've talked about the pipeline of new generation,
but also the value of Huntly, and the exploration
of use of biomass. What are you... what, what would you like
to see to enable that the u- the
continued use of an asset that is nationally significant, but
with the decarbonization priority that we have?
What is going to enable that, in particular,
the biomass section? Is it s- is it something you're happy to
do yourself, or you think there's other mechanisms that we might need?
I've got a couple of other questions as well, Chair, if we've got time.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, th- thanks, Scott. Um, first of all, ultimately, the
build in new renewables is gonna make the, the, the amount of
time that thermal generation is dispatched, reduce.
Um, and ultimately, success looks like having that in reserve and
never needing it. Uh, but disaster will be needing it and not having
it. Uh, and so, for us, f- fuel
diversity at its, maximum, and the ability for
the market to support that generation in reserve is, are, are
critical elements. In terms of how these reforms play into it, I'm just
gonna ask Alice to, be specific about, what we, what we're
asking for.
Cool. Um, thanks, Malcolm. So, we've noted in our
submission, some commentary around biomass and making sure that
biomass, is enabled. Um, and I think the interesting
thing to remember for us all is that once we do start, hopefully
using biomass in the future, that Huntly or part of Huntly's generation will become
renewable electricity generation as defined if that definition is continued
through from the NPSRE- the current NPSREG.
Um, so look, it is something that we are looking to support, and we've
provided some drafting to hopefully, provide for biomass
through the reform as well.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Grant McCallum, and then we'll hoop back round
Scott.
Yeah. Thanks, Madam Chair. Uh, look, thanks very much for your submission.
I've just got a question around, sort of flowing a wee bit on from where, Scott
was, around, H- Huntly. Now, some of our...
we've... Some submitters say they want, councils and so forth to have the
ability to put emissions reduction, as part of their,
as part of the whole, planning structure and so
forth. If that was included, what sort of impact would that have on a, an
asset like Huntly in terms of trying to, keep it operating
effectively, in terms of, you know, g- and given the statements you've made
about how critical it is as a backup now, our
sector?
So I think the most, the most important thing from a,
a, a, a, a, a macroeconomic perspective is to understand that energy equals
prosperity. Uh, and we are in an energy transition, with
30% electrific- electrified today as an economy.
So 30% of our annual energy comes from electricity, 70% comes
from imported sources broadly. Uh, if we get to 60%
electrification, then we'll reach net zero, by 2050 as
a country. Um, Genesis has set a target of reaching net zero by
2040 with Huntly in place. Uh, and obviously,
that is, underpinned by building new renewables between now and
then, but that's an average, okay?
Getting to 95% plus renewable generation is an average.
There will be times, when you have to call on thermal to keep the lights on
for short periods of time. And so I think it's the nature of,
any emissions controls that will be relevant to, the operation of
Huntly, and the last two years have been a good example.
Two years ago, we had an extremely dry year, and our emissions, doubled
as a company. Uh, this year we've had a wet year, and they're very, very
negligible. Uh, and that's, that's the reality of a high renewables grid.
If you wanna drive your car faster, you need a better braking system, and Huntly is
the braking system for a renewables grid.
Um, Alice, do you want to comment specifically on, on that?
Uh, look, I think you've covered it all, Malcolm.
And I think the, the key here, just to add, and to highlight,
is that flexibility needed-
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm
... when Mother Nature doesn't show up.
So, we have asked for Huntly to be considered,
under that specified energy activities-
Yeah
... so that we can continue into the future because we don't know what that future
will exactly require, as to Malcolm's point about how much thermal
generation will be required or not.
Good. Thank you.
And Scott, we'll come back to you for a further
question.
Thank you. And I guess if Mother Nature doesn't turn up, biomass could.
But you've, you've said that, successfully decarboning,
decarbonizing our economy and society to reach net zero by 2050 will, will need
lots of new renewables, while maintaining some
generation. But we also heard that from, in another select
committee that we'll need to work hard to secure social
license. Do you think there's adequate provision in
these two bills to ensure the social license for what's
needed? And if there isn't, what else do we need to do to, to ensure we've got that
social license? Because we're gonna need a lot of it.
Yeah, and I think, it's difficult to sit here today and say what the social
license criteria of 2035 or 2045, you know, might
be other than it will be very different to what it is today.
Uh, and just wanna rein- reinforce the comment you made a- around
biomass. Uh, we currently store more electricity in our
forests than we do in our lakes in the coal stockpile at Huntly.
Uh, and, with what's happening in the world at the moment, domestic fuel
sources are, are highly prized in, in these types of
scenarios. Um, so fuel diversity is a critical element of energy
security. Uh, and, the ability to
maintain social license will primarily come from keeping the lights on
first and foremost, because if we don't keep the lights on then our social
license disappears very quickly.
Um, secondary will to be ensure, to ensure that, as we
do decarbonize our economy over the next 25 years, that we're
doing so in a responsible way. And, you know, there are,
there are many attractions towards biomass as a fuel
source. Uh, and, equally, you know, if you
have a Cyclone Gabrielle type event and you h- lose a whole lot of
forests, you need other fuel sources as well.
So energy security is about layers, and having
layers of security. Uh, and ultimately, social
license will dictate which parts of those layers are used first, and as we
move into a more decarbonized world, lower carbon fuels will be,
will be favored over higher carbon fuels.
But if you get to the point where the lights are going out, then, any fuel, I
suspect, will be socially acceptable.
Thank you very much. Did you have another question there, Scott, 'cause I might
jump in with one as well. Um...
Uh, just, just a very quick question on local area energy planning because I, I
note that,
Genesis has got a, a battery energy storage system
going in at Huntly and a new solar farm near, near
Huntly, so what are your thoughts on, on
local area energy planning? Which i- if we're thinking about social
license and spatial planning, building resilience in
local areas with council, with iwi, with, with
community, with, with the, energy sector,
EDBs, do you think that's a pathway we can go
down to, to build more social license
and, and have a more,
yeah, more, better s- better, resilience in our
communities?
Look, you know, Genesis is deeply invested in distributed energy,
and exploring distributed energy.
Uh, we're the largest distributed energy retailer in New Zealand with round about
33,000 customers across New Zealand.
5% of our total supply in January this year came from rooftop solar from our
customers. Um, so this will all play a role both in
terms of the, the eme- e- evolution of the grid,
but also in terms of, grid resilience as well.
Obviously, if you can distribute energy, I mean, the reason we build solar farms in
Canterbury and, and, and Eastern Bay of Plenty and Waikato and,
and Manawatu is 'cause we wanna spread them out,
because, you know, the sun shines in different places at different times.
But equally, we live in a world and a country that has volcanoes and
earthquakes and things like that, and so, having, things spread out makes
a lot of sense. Distributed energy ultimately fits into that,
but it's not for everybody. Uh, and, and, and the grid will
continue to play a role alongside, distributed energy for the foreseeable
future.
Thank you. Look, I just wanted to quickly jump in and ask a couple of questions
around the definitions 'cause that's something that you've raised in your,
submission, and it's been raised a few times, in terms of the
definition of infrastructure. Uh, and so
I'm just wondering if you could just elaborate a little bit further, and
why you see y- you want that to change.
Um, and then also the definition of renewable energy
activity and obviously reverting back to,
the amended December 2025
definition.
Sure. Thank you. Alice, do you wanna handle that?
Yeah, sure. Um, so starting with your first question, Chair, around,
the definition of infras- infrastructure, part of our
considerations there, relate to designations
and how, you know, how the definitions throughout the bills,
interact and where they show up. Um, and so
because not all electricity related infrastructure is covered by
designations, we seek that that is through amendments
to the bills. Um, and then to your second point about
the, the definition of renewable electricity
generation, look, we've, we've worked really hard, over a long
time to get that, MPS, the current MPS REG
amended, and consider that the definition
within the MPS REG is, is a really good definition
to bring forward into the new system.
Um, and so that's why we've supported, or seeking that that is,
provided for.
And if it wasn't,
in terms of the renewable energy activity
definition, what-
Yeah
... what are, what are the risks?
Yeah. It's be- it comes down to, the, I guess the wide
variety o- of activities that are associated with renewable electricity generation.
It's not just where we, make the electricity, it's all the
subsidiary, it's all the investigation, it's all the,
groundwork that goes towards building a renewable generation asset,
from the, you know, we use the word twinkle in our eye, from when that
is considered. So having a definition that covers the full breadth of
our project planning process, will better provide for
us, in enabling renewables, under the new
system.
Thank you for that clarification.
Um, look, we've got time for one last question, and Grant McCollum has his hand
up.
Y- yeah. Actually, it is quite a good lead-in to, um...
Like, you, you highlight if we get it right-
We can actually, I would suspect, save quite a bit of cost if we
get the process right in terms of, you know, which would
have a, a- I imagine have a, quite an impact on
the, the, the cost of the asset and therefore the, the
return required to pay it off, therefore the price of electricity and that sort of
thing. Does it all have an impact? And, and also tied into that as, as you
highlight with your reconsenting issues, if you want to call it that,
around, Tekapo. It, it all feeds, I, I presume, feeds
into that same, that same challenge.
That's, that's correct. I mean, ul- ultimately, electricity is a capital
intensive industry.
Yeah.
Uh, it doesn't matter whether it's generating, distributing, transmitting, or
using electricity, it's capital intensive.
Um, so the lower the, the lower you can keep that capital and the lower you can
keep the cost of that capital, the less, s- of that cost flows
through to the, you know, to the end consumer.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and so the most important thing in, electricity is, is,
being, match fit to compete for capital.
Thank you.
Uh, look, Ryan Hamilton, a quick question.
Go for it.
Thank you. Um, just, just your point on being recognized as a
designated authority, if I got that
right term. Yeah, obviously, you make a, you make a point.
Obviously, you've, you know, you're frustrated with the ability to designate,
your role in terms of consenting.
Do you think that looks a little bit like, you know, the government...
Well, this bill's been criticized as having too much ministerial power.
Do you think that's almost, it's a, it's a parallel to yourselves, that there's no
perhaps check or balance in that regard?
Alice, do you want to pick that up?
Yeah, great question, Ryan. I hadn't considered it that way.
Um, what I would say is in terms of, being, having
requiring authority status and being able to, have
designations really is to unlock,
things like transmission. So, transmission to Castle Hill
Wind Farm, for an examp- as an example, or other assets, that
we may build in the future, could enable those projects to be to the
point, to the part of the discussion before around the cost, and the
time frames for delivering those projects, all on that path towards,
decarbonization as well.
Okay. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for that very insightful submission.
Lots of really good points to take on board, so appreciate your time
today.
Thank you. All the best.
Kia ora.
Thank you. So now, we
welcome through our next submitter, which is the New Zealand Law
Society.
Welcome, Vicki, to the select committee this afternoon,
and you've got some colleagues there as well, Mary and Benyon.
Welcome. Uh,
we have your submission. It is a very weighty submission.
Many, many pages here. Uh, so do take it as read.
Uh, but look, we'll hand it over to you to talk us through, the main
points and highlights, from the submission.
So over to you.
Tena koe, otira, tena koutou katoa.
Um, ae, mi hiana, a, kia koutou e te
komiti whiriwhiri. Ae, kaikone matau hei mangai
mo te kahuiture o Aotearoa. Um, so we're here on
behalf of New Zealand Law Society.
I'm the convener of the Environmental Law Committee, and with me, I've
got Mary Hill, who is a member of our committee and notably was
president of the RMLA at the time of the Randerson Review.
Uh, and we've also got Tom Benyon, who is from our Climate Change
Committee. Uh, the submitt- the submission, which you referred to as being
weighty, has, been a product of, cross-committee
collaboration, so there's been five different Law Society committees involved
with it. Uh, it is currently the longest submission that the
New Zealand Law Society has made. Um, the submission
focuses on public constitutional workability and litigation
risk matters and generally does not comment on public policy,
matters. It makes a number of detailed drafting
recommendations and notes some omissions as well as
raises several overarching concerns.
So what we're going to speak to you today about is just a couple of these
overarching concerns, and then we'll leave a good amount of time for
questions. Uh, so in terms of, how we'll run
this, I'm just gonna speak briefly to some Treaty and Māori clause
issues, then Mary will speak to integration and property law,
and then Tom, will round us out with a brief, kōrero
on climate change. So
if there's anything we cannot answer today, 'cause as I said, there's been five
different c-committees and over 20 people involved, we're
more than happy to, if it would assist the committee, to respond in writing if
there's, something that we're not able to cover between us
three. So turning then to Treaty and Māori issues,
the bills make major changes in which, Te Tiriti o
Waitangi obligations and the rights and interests of Māori are recognized and
provided for. Uh, the compressed policy and drafting time
frames did not permit sufficient engagement or proper Treaty impact analysis
to be done on the bill's proposals, and in the Law Society's, view, this
leaves a gap in the analysis which is at odds with the stated
intention of the bill that it should be durable, provide
generational and lasting change for planning and resource management,
and honor the Treaty's obligations.
There are three issues that I just wanted to highlight.
The first, is a relation- is in, in relation to the
omission of, the equivalent of the, the RMA Part
2 Māori provisions, so those are Sections 6C,
7A, and 8. Um, and that's at odds with the
recommendations of the government's expert advisory group.
Uh, it doesn't sit comfortably with the regulatory impact statement, the
Treaty advice provided by officials.
Uh-With respect to Section 6E as well, it
also makes a fundamental change of a, a really long-standing position, some
50 years, that it is a matter of national importance to
recognize and provide for Māori relationships with their ancestral
whenua. That was first brought in in 1977 as part
of the Town and Country Planning Act.
Uh, the Law Society considers the omission of those provisions is likely to
result in legal uncertainty and litigation, and consequently a
long period in which the law will remain unsettled.
The second point is in relation to the limitations on Māori involvement
in decision-making. Um, so there's a number of submissions raised,
or points raised in the submission
around that. Uh, while there's some limited involvement in,
plan making and national instruments, in relation
to per- to permitting, Māori would need to establish their standing
as being either directly affected or qualifying persons.
Um, and the consequence of this is that it may result in relevant
information about cultural values and issues or impacts
not being brought before the decision-maker.
It also raises a significant constitutional concern in terms of
upholding, Te Tiriti's Article Two guarantees in terms
of, mana whenua over whenua and,
why.
Another similar concern relates to restricting, mana hakahono
ā-rohe, from being used moving forward.
Uh, basically freezes it, that in time.
The final point I wanted to just touch on before I hand over to Mary relates to
treaty settlements, and that is, the addition of the
qualifiers same or equivalent effect and to the greatest extent
possible in relation to how treaty settlements are treated,
may derogate from those settlement obligations, and it also
introduces considerable uncertainty and is likely to be fertile
ground for litigation. The two-year timeframe for negotiations
with, post-settlement government entities are likely to be
unrealistic given the number of settlements and the complexity of this
work. So I'm now just gonna pass over to Mary to speak briefly about
integration of the bills and, a property law matter.
Kia ora.
Kia ora, Vicky, and tēnā tātou katoa.
Um, as Vicky said, I'm going to just deal with two issues.
Um, one is, quite a substantial issue.
Uh, the other one may not appear, as important, but it's a matter that's been
overlooked on previous reviews of our resource management
system. Um, and so our property law section, wanted
it to be highlighted, so I will do that.
Um, so the first point, relates to the, the, the two
bills, and the way that they
interact. Um, so, so as you know, the bills
propose a two-act structure. Um, and
it's become pretty clear following our review that
there's a high level of duplication between the
two bills. Um, and that gives rise to a
concern, that, contrary to the
objectives, there might actually be increased complexity
because, every time you look at an issue, you're going to need to
cross-check, both pieces of legislation.
Um, and through our, discussions and engagement with
practitioners, this, this hasn't been an issue of
concern that has been raised. And what I mean by that is the fact
that, previously there was one piece of legislation seems to
be workable. Um, and splitting them into two appears to have
come about through, a legitimate
objective of ensuring that consenting, in
particular, is dealt with efficiently and,
it isn't sort of opened up to, to wider issues and litigation.
And so that's a, a noble objective, but we're not sure that
it's actually been achieved, due to the way in which,
the, two acts interact.
Um, I mean, it is widely recognized that good resource management
decision-making involves integrated, decisions, so
holistic decisions. Um, and we think that there's,
potentially a real risk that in trying to draw a bright line
between development on the one hand, and natural environment,
on the other, could actually result in perverse outcomes a-
and potentially environmentally damaging,
outcomes. Um, and I suppose the other important point to make
is that, perversely, splitting them into two
could increase litigation risk, and complexity.
So, so you're not ending up achieving, the, the key
objective. Um, we do of course acknowledge that
there's been a lot of work that's gone into developing the two separate pieces of
legislation, and that it would be an unusual step at select committee
stage to attempt to, to merge those back
into one. And so what we've endeavored to do through our
submission
is to, focus on areas where,
whilst retaining the two pieces of legislation, they could be better
integrated. Um, and I'll just give a couple of, of quick
examples. Um, the first one is the proposed
restriction under the Natural Environment Bill in Clause
14 from considering effects under the Planning Act.
So that would apply, for example, to a consent authority.
So when they're considering a permit under the Natural Environment
Act, they're not able to have regard to any effects that are
regulated under the Planning Act.
Um, and we've given an example of, a potential area where that
simply might not allow, a decision to be made,
and that relates to geothermal permits.
So those are only considered under the Natural Environment
Act, and yet they include, geothermal features
include, landscape features and landscape
considerations. Um, and because landscape is only a concept
considered under the Planning Act, um-A permit
authority would not be able to include the landscape elements of, of
geothermal features. Um, so, so that's just one example, and
more broadly we have found that the issue is likely to arise
where you have dual functions between a territorial authority,
which is the regulator under the Planning Act, and a
regional council, which is a regulator under the Natural Environment Act.
So dual functions apply, for example, in relation to contaminated
land, in relation to natural hazards.
So you will have areas where the bills recognise a dual function, because
they do, and yet when you get to the permitting or consenting
stage, they don't acknowledge that there might need to be some crossover of
considerations. Um, I did listen to Mish- Minister
Bishop when he appeared before the committee, and he seemed to
suggest that those matters or the integration issues could be
dealt with, in the national standards.
But our concern of course is that those haven't been developed yet, or at
least, we haven't seen those yet.
And so our submission is that they're better to be, addressed
upfront in the bills themselves to allow for some limited
exemptions for those crossover or dual areas to
ensure that we don't get the perverse outcomes that we're concerned
about. Um, and another area is, public
notification. So, there's obviously proposed to be
separate thresholds for public notification u- under the two
bills. Um, and we have submitted that the
rationale for this doesn't appear to be clear, and in fact
might be around the wrong way because in relation to the
Natural Environment Act, that's an issue dealing with
values that are held in common or by the
commons. Um, and yet the threshold for
notification under that act actually is, more
restrictive. So it would rely heavily on
particular individuals or affected parties to raise those
wider environmental issues, and those parties might not
be well equipped or re- well resourced to be able to do that.
So where we land on that is that there should be a single or, or in common
threshold for public notification, in the Planning Act
and the Natural Environment Act. Um,
and that that should be the, the less restrictive threshold that's currently
proposed under the Planning Act. Um, so that's the
integration issue, and j- yeah, just very briefly,
the property law issue, is one that is
commonly, commonly raised in practice, which relates to the
vesting of roads and reserves on
subdivisions. And the way that the RMA was
drafted, and this has been carried over into the planning bill,
is that when you go to do a subdivision, you need to go and get the
consent of anyone that has an interest
in, the area to be vested. So not the landowner
itself, but it could be 20, 30, 40 other
people who have historic interests that were never removed.
Um, and you also have to go and get the consent of the banks in relation to
that. Um, and if you can't get consent of all parties, you have to go off to the
High Court for an order. Um, and the High Court is
invariably granting these because it's finding there's no actual prejudice,
these are historic things. But it does significantly incle-
increase the cost, and delay subdivision.
It take, can take many, many months to get, to get a High Court order.
So, we're proposing a simple amendment to the relevant schedule in the
bill, to require only the consent of the relevant land
holders rather than those wider, interested
parties. Um, so that's something that could usefully be tidied
up. So I'm now gonna hand over to Tom Binning,
to discuss the climate change issues, and then
hopefully we've got some time to come back for
questions.
Kia ora koutou. So I'm just here to present the small part
of this, which is from the climate, committee of the Law
Society. Um, I guess our points are pretty,
straightforward. We first of all note that the,
bills, or at least one of them, refers clearly to the
adaptation plans and, o- of the Climate,
Change Response Act, and they clearly envisage
adaptation to climate change. So that seems clear
enough. And so the question then becomes, what is the bills
doing about mitigation? And we've had a look through and said, well,
it really isn't clear. You can kinda read the, try and read
the tea leaves of the, of the two sets of goals and see if climate
mitigation is in there, but it, it seems unclear.
And I guess this falls into two, two parts.
One is,
are we, in terms of, planning to, you
know, the planning bills, spatial bills, and all that sort of thing, are we
planning, is the intention to plan for mitigation?
So, you know, whatever that be, public transport and
layout of towns and all those sorts of things.
Um, and the other chunk of this is for individual activities.
Um, is mitigation, part of
that? So I just see Genesis were on, before this
and, you know, if they've got a significant project, are they
able to say, "You must count re- the, the renewable a-
aspect of our project as, as, a matter in favor of
it." Uh, and it makes it that important public benefit, maybe it comes under
those, s- significant public benefits of,
for infrastructure. And on the other hand, if people are saying, "Well, what
about projects that have significant emissions?" Are we able to
talk about, you know, the fact
that that, that's not helping with mitigation?
So there's, you know, those two sides of the same coin, if you like.
So I think those are the two main points.
Oh, and I think the last point too would be-Um, there is a
risk with some of the settings, in particular I think we've mentioned in relation
to wetlands, that, you might be
losing carbon sequestration, that is
currently available, if some of, if some of the
settings change. In particular, currently the law
provides for the preservation of
wetlands and protection from an appropriate subdivision, et
cetera. Now, that preservation requirement is
disappearing. Um, that may result in a
change in the, in the way we, w- what, what happens with
wetlands, and so areas may disappear that have sequestration
issues associated with it. So those are the comments from the Law
Society's, Climate Subcommittee.
Look, thank you very much. Uh, we have just a couple of minutes for
some questions. We'll go to Julie-Anne Genter
first.
Oh, Julie-Anne, you've got your-
Kia ora. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um, I actually had a question about something which I haven't been able to find in
your written submission, but it's been raised by other submitters.
So I wanted to ask if you had any thought about the
role of national direction and the process for
setting that, because quite a few submitters have
thought it's too, held too closely by,
ministerial powers, and that perhaps a board of inquiry process would
be more transparent and enable more public
participat- participation in a,
systematic way. And just wondering if you, if you
were able to speak to any of that. Um, but also, on
Tom's point, just, we've heard from
some submitters that it would be really important to have climate
change specifically acknowledged in the,
goals. Um,
so j- yeah.
Wondering if you can comment on that as well.
I'll, I'll pass that one over to Mary, and maybe followed by Tom if he's got
any comment from a climate change perspective.
Sure. Kia ora, Vicki. Um, kia ora, Julie-Anne.
Uh, so
the Law Society would support the position of
other practitioners, which is that the more public
engagement you can have on a document, particularly one that sits
at the top of the funnel, the better, and you're likely to
reduce litigation risk as you move down the
funnel. Um, the other point that I would make is,
there didn't appear to be any significant litigation
arising out of boards of inquiry processes around the development
of national direction, and in fact there was a, a call for
greater national direction, under the current regime.
So it's something that's really well-supported,
and I think important to get right, and that involves, in my view, and
I think the Law Society's view, the engagement of the public.
Yeah, just, just to briefly add one comment.
So
the, national natural environment plans, for example, will
include, particular regard to the adaptation
plans under the Climate Change Response Act.
Now we also have, emissions reduction plans from
the Climate Change Commission. So it seems like an area
where, you know, a simple reference would, would bring in
all of that planning that's already been done, all of that thinking that's already
been done. We're doing it on the adaptation side, so the, the curiosity
is why it's not there on the, mitigation
side.
Thank you. Look, we've got time for one last question from Grant
McCallum.
Yeah. Hi. Uh, thanks, Mary. You, your very last point touched on an example I've
literally had go across my desk recently about development and
that, that, that's... So I'm just trying to understand where, where you
say only relevant landowners should have to be consulted, who
are you meaning by relevant landowners as opposed to everybody in the whole
subdivision? W-
It's, so, so the issue that's arising relates
to historic interests. So
people that, do not own the subject land, so not
the subdivision-
Yeah
... site-
... but they have an historic interest in it.
So the proposal from the Law Society is that
only the owners of the subject land, so not people who have an
interest, which is different from an ownership interest.
So only those with an ownership interest in the subject land would be
consulted, which is usually going to be the developer or the, the
subdivision themselves.
Okay. Thank you. That makes it clear. Thank you. Really, that's a great idea.
Take that on board . Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today,
and for, you know, all the work that has gone into, your
largest submission that you have done.
So, we appreciate all of that work and all the, the valuable
insights in there, and, lot to consider, so thank you very much.
Kia ora.
Me mia nakia kai tou.
Look, members, we are now going to break, so we
will return at 3:41. So we'll break for 10
minutes, and resume
then.Welcome
back, everyone. Uh, and we
can see our next submitter, to
the Environment Committee this afternoon.
We have, Local Government New Zealand.
So, welcome. Uh, you have 20 minutes with
us. Uh, of course, take your submission as read.
Another great submission, lot in there.
So, look, we'll get you to talk us through the main points and then open up
questions.
Kia ora. Good afternoon. Um, I am Rigit Stoltz.
I am the president of LGNZ and also the Mayor of
Gisborne. And today alongside me, I have Dion
Swiggs. He is the Chair of Environment Canterbury and
also the Chair of LGNZ's, regional
sector. And then we're also supported by William Blackler, who's a senior
policy advisor at LGNZ.
Councils are the most important player in resource
management. Not only do they fulfill crucial roles on the
front line of planning and environmental
management, but we also need to take into account that they are the
custodians of a quarter of the nation's
infrastructure, and they must also navigate the
system themselves. They have also been held
responsible for some failures of the Resource Management Act, and I think that's
well documented. While councils are not perfect,
we do believe they have unfairly been made scapegoats
for some of the flaws with the legislation itself, such
as the failure to provide adequate national
direction. Uh, to be clear, every single
council wants a more efficient system which
delivers better, housing and better infrastructure
that we need, but also protecting the natural
environment. We hope the new legislation can draw a
line under the criticism currently, received by
councils. The overwhelming message we've received
from our members is the question of
substantive reform of the Resource Management Act
need to resolve for the long term with as
much political consensus as
possible. Um, every council,
knows that we want this to happen once in
a lifetime. Um,
just pick over here. The resource management is a
contentious subject, and within our membership, there is
a wide range of views. But overall,
LGNZ is very supportive of the direction
of the government's new legislation.
There are, however, a few key areas where we have
concerns, some of them more fundamental in
nature.
Some of our concerns are not so much about the legislation
itself, but what else local government
currently have on its plate.What will already
be a difficult transition to the new resource management regime
is being made even harder through other
concurrent reforms. These include potential
changes to the local government structure, funding and
financing changes, amendments to the existing,
RMA, continued implementation of Local Waters
Done Well, and then on top of that also rates capping.
Particularly for smaller councils, this is a huge
workload, and one they'll be asked to do with less
resourcing given the enormous pressure to keep rates
down. And they're also expected to move
quickly to be within the target band that the government has set for the
rates capping.
With the new legislation,
while the new legislation should in the long term save councils
money, there are considerable costs associated
with transition, and according to MFE, that sits around
$860 million.
Adequate resourcing will be crucial to ensure the transition
is done well and provides a solid
long-term foundation for the new system to operate
on. With this in mind, LGNZ last year called
on the government to include a package of support in this year's
budget. Thank you for reading our, thorough written
submission. We will not, go through that word by word
today. I will now hand over to Dion, and he will
highlight some key points himself. Thank you.
Yeah. Thanks, Rohit. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
And, Grant, I see you've already got your hand up, so I, I, I expect you're
gonna have some curly questions for us. Um, good to see you again.
Um, just firstly, I really wanna say there is a lot to like about
these, the new reforms, from the perspective of
councils. Uh, the mandatory spatial planning, a reduction in the
consenting workloads, and a focus on getting national direction
in place quickly, will address all of...
well, some of the flaws of the current RMA system and a lot of the noise that you
hear from, councils around, the implementation and doing things
and getting things done. Uh, but there are a couple of issues that I'd like to
highlight before we get into the committee's questions, and these are, with
many of the councils that have already expressed, serious reservations
about, regulatory relief. Uh, while we understand the intent
behind it, there are a range of issues, with the
proposals as they stand. We have recommended a pause on the
implementation until they can be addressed or alternatives such as better use
of existing tools that councils use for redress for private
landowners already. Uh, we wanted to note, that some councils
already provide, relief such as rates remission for land
subject to QE2 covenants. Uh, for example, there are,
there is scope for the government to work with councils to expand this sort of
voluntary relief, without resorting to an entirely new
regime. And we're also concerned that, that the timeframes
and sequencing for that plan making in the transition are
unrealistic and could compromise the quality of the first plans made
under the new legislation. We support the work that Tai
Tuara, which has broken down this process in detail and
advocated for a modest exti- extension to allow for
24 months for the notification of a draft regional spatial plan,
to give councils and central government the time they need for a
successful transition period. Tai Tuara recommended
re- re-sequencing this process so they are prepared after
necessary national direction is released and the national ask
and the environmental standards are confirmed, which again, we
support. Uh, Te Uru Kahika also looked at the, transitional
arrangements in some detail, and I'd recommend that you, look at
that, those recommendations and, Te Uru Kahika will be
speaking tomorrow. Uh, there are some...
There are obviously some other issues which we will...
which we have elaborated on in our written submission, but we'd like
to give the committee as much time as possible to ask questions.
So thank you again for giving us this opportunity, and it's, it's great to
be here alongside Rohit and, and
William.
No, thanks, Dion and Rohit. I'm sure the sun is shining in
Gisborne too.
Fabulous day here.
Yeah. Um, look, I'll hand over to, Grant
McCallum, who did have his hand up first.
So, we'll give him the first question.
Yeah. G'day, and go Dion, Rohit, I appreciate all you
do. Uh, and your submission. Thank you.
Just I suppose mine's more quite a specific one.
It's one I've struck particularly with small councils, and that's
t- ability to have the appropriate resource, particularly in the planning
sector, to actually-
Mm
... to be able to deliver in this space.
Yeah.
Um, you know, as you... you know, when we've had developers through and that sort
of thing, and that's an internal frustration for them, particularly ones that
operate across the country. The, the, the, the, the difference in ability
and, and it's not a criticism of the individuals.
Often it's just a, it's a simple resourcing issue.
Any comment on that and whether, you know, how, how, how...
whether these reforms might actually help in that space?
Yeah, I agree. Uh, well, I'll, I'll start and then Dion can, can lean in as well.
It's a huge issue for small councils.
And like when I sp- started speaking earlier, talking about all
the other things that are also on top of councils,
and, the resourcing needed in order for us to make sure
we've got high quality plans and-
Mm. Mm
... and, combined regional spatial plans that are the
outcome that we are all after. No one wants plans or,
tools that are not fit for purpose and not better than what we've had.
But I absolutely agree with you. The support needed, the spec-
the special staff needed, and the disruption in the system
also
causes some people to say, "Do I still wanna work in local government, and do I
want to be involved here?"
Mm.
So that, that unintended consequence also from all the reforms
and reviews might have that, outcome as well that,
that we might be short-staffed and need even more support.
Yeah, just, I just wanted to add one thing to that, Grant.
One of the unintended, issues that I think is happening right now, and this is
a very real thing that's, that's, that councils are facing, especially in the
regional sector who we'll be looking at-
Mm
... and some smaller councils that I've spoken to.
There are staff who are leaving because they're being poached by, by
corporations-
Yeah, yeah
... or not corporations, by businesses who are ramping up ready for these plans
to be implemented, and there is only a certain amount of resource of people that
can do this work. So there's a, there is a very real risk at the moment that if you
s-
Mm.
If you s- if you spread the, the load too thin, especially within councils,
that you'll slow the, slow the process down.
So we need to get some certainty around the, the, the, the, the s-
the planning and making sure that we have enough economies of scale so
that the people can do the work.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, now we'll go to Priyanka.
Thank you. Um, and thanks for your very thorough written
submission, and clear oral submission as well.
Um, you've, you've laid out quite clearly in your written
submission, that the combination of
regulatory relief provisions in, in this
legislation, plus the government progressing rate caps and the
potential other changes to local government as well, could
result in substantial, financial implications for
councils. Uh, and you've called for this
part of the legislation to be stopped.
Um, I'm, I'm keen to get a sense from you if
the regulatory relief components were to progress
alongside, everything else that the government has said they're
keen to progress, particularly rates caps.
Um, what are some of the real world implications
for council other than the financial ones?
What are the types of decisions that councils will have to make, and
what are the implications for ratepayers potentially?
So I'll make a quick comment and then pass over to, to Dionne and,
we'll potentially... I do know that,
even though at this stage the regulatory relief is quite unclear and we're
not 100% sure how it will impact on councils, but
if I think specifically smaller councils that have to make decisions, if
you put rates capping to one side and you have the regulatory relief
which you might take into account, we have
areas of special protection, or in our place, huge areas that are
Maori land or where there are specific areas that could
be, caught up in that area. When we need to start taking or
making decisions about what we can fit under the rates
cap, and the unintended consequence might be that
we then ne- need to, that we as a region are forced
to, look after the bare basics and make decisions where
those protections then don't take place because we can't,
accommodate-
Mm
... them under the rates cap. So for a small region like us, we might
see protection, areas or, or
biodiversity, gains that we've made in the last while, we
lose that because we have to make decisions to fix the sewage
and the roads. Um, so that's just a small practical,
example. Dionne, I might pass over to you.
No, I think you've covered it very well.
The, the, the simple reality, especially if n- the indigenous biodiversity
baselines become the baseline when it g- when it is,
implemented,
things just will not get done. There is, there is only a finite amount of money,
and if you're sitting within that, within that framework, especially from a
regional perspective, there will be work that just does not get done because
there is no money in the system, or no money to generate.
Because if, if without any other ways of fixing the funding issues of
local government, because local government really only has rates as a
tool, we are going to be s- chopping ourselves off at the knees
effectively.
Just to sup to that, if I, if I may.
Yes, go for it. Go for it.
Um, thanks. Other submitters have also made the point that councils
might be put in a position, given that the protections or the goal
is no net loss of indigenous biodiversity, that there might be
a perverse outcome where non-indigenous biodiversity gets protected
because it doesn't come into the regulatory relief sort of provisions.
Is that something that you've heard from your members as well?
William, you might want to, to comment.
Uh, I, I saw that in the, I think it was the Environmental Defense
Society submission. I don't know if I've heard it, specifically from
any councils, but it did strike me as quite a, perverse
incentive in the regulatory relief regime, and certainly something that should be
looked at closely by the, by the government if they do push ahead with,
regulatory relief.
Thank you.
Thank you. Look, we'll move to Lan Pham
now.
Tena koutou. Thank you so much for an excellent
submission, as always, LGNZ. Um, I
wanted to pick up on the point that has been
made by numerous submitters, but, like,
really great to kind of crystallize it at this point, and that's
the point you make about the timing of
when regional spatial plans are meant to be put in place
versus when the environmental limits are meant to be put in place.
And you're noting that the regional spatial plans are intended
to be completed nine months before the first natural
environment plans are completed.
How much is this sort of living in the
upside down world where we haven't addressed that
timing issue yet as the bill still stands,
and if it wasn't changed,
will we essentially be putting in place spatial plans that don't
get us anywhere, or don't meet, aren't on our, on the p- pathway to
even potentially meet community environmental limits and whatnot?
Can you comment on that?
I might pass to you, Dionne, because we discussed it the other day and you had,
good thoughts around that.
Yeah, no, absolutely. So I, I really would encourage the,
the, the committee to look at the sequencing of not just
this bill, but also the simplification for local government alongside
everything else that you're trying to do.
But when it comes to the, to the limits, you've got your human health limits
wh- which will be set by the national direction, and then you've also got
the, the, the, the limits that
will be set by regional councils, which are around the, the ecolog-
ecological limits. If you don't get these sequenced
correctly, what you're gonna have to have happen is that you're gonna have to go
back and redo the spatial plan potentially, and that's going to be a big, long
process, and you're, you're not saving anybody any money.
So if we did get the sequencing in the right order, get
your, get your national direction out first so that we know those limits,
work with the understanding of, of your, your
ecological limits, and then you can feed that into your spatial planning
into those chapters. Depends on which way that the government wants to intend
on, on spatial planning and if it actually needs to make effect to those limits
or if it's the other way around, but that's something that's a little bit ambiguity
in the, way that things have been written at the moment.
Thank you. Grant, you have another question.
Yeah. Um, this is around, ca- catchment groups and so forth.
Like, you talk about the limits being set nationally, and but e- how
important is it that they have the ability to look at catchment by catchment
alam- setting of limits because obviously there are different challenges
in different parts of the country and, and, and within different
regions?
Yeah.
I mean, I could probably say something around the catchment groups, and this is
where, this is where, the rules that come out in the
national direction, because we don't know what they look like at the moment-
Mm
... are they going to be very, very prescriptive, or are they going to allow us to
do some of the non-regulatory space?
So catchment groups, as you know, they work really well in that non-regulatory
space.
Yeah.
And giving them that space and freedom to work in that non-regulatory space is
going to be really important, and what does that mean, then mean, and how do they
feed into the, into the, into the, land use chapters and
also into the environmental chapters in their, in their basis
areas? But what I'm really concerned about is if, if you set the
limits f- through your national, your national bottom
lines, and then a catchment group goes, "Okay, we, we know our
catchment, and this, this is g- not going to meet the needs of our community or, or
for our future farming needs in that community.
We need to go higher than those limits," then regulatory relief
becomes a problem, because then councils will have to do
regulatory relief if you're gonna go above those or going to go above-
Yeah
... those limits that you set. So there needs to be enough flexibility to allow
non-regulatory tools and non-regulatory interventions, especially at those
catchment group levels, 'cause they do work, and we are seeing some really good
outcomes from those.
Yeah. Thanks. Very helpful. Thank you.
I might just jump in and just ask a final question because it's quite interesting
'cause you, at the beginning of your submission, you talk about the
mega ministry, and obviously are supportive
of it, but then you raise a few, perhaps
concerns around the, implementation and
how, I suppose, local government's gonna work with central government in terms
of implementing the reform. Could you just,
elaborate a little bit on that in terms of your
thinking?
Well, I think-
'Cause we haven't actually heard from individual councils on this specific issue,
so I just thought it was interesting to hear from you as the, you know,
the organization representing them all.
I do think nearly every council would say there's a lot of
benefit from having that greater coordination across the
areas. Uh, it drives all of us nuts when you deal with one and there's not talk
between, ministries. And, and I, I personally
think every single council will see the value, but I think we
need to also be honest that it will be disruptive in the short term as we all
find our lane and see how it works, and,
make sure that those channels are communicated
well. And so I think at the end of the day, getting the
clarity on how it will work so that we can also get our members
to, in the short term, as our members find themselves in
this tsunami of reform, we are also doing
this ministry which is, is changing.
So I think everyone agreed it would be nice to have all of those together, but
it's just how we get there, and the direction we then,
receive from the government, how it will work for all of us.
I don't know if William might want to add something a bit less emotive
than me from a, from a -- ... operational
view.
No, I think that sounds about right.
There's, there's one other thing that strikes me there as well, is, and it's
that, I suppose it's from a contestability of advice,
point of view. Uh, the local government branch of, of DIA has an
important role, I think, kind of,
pointing out the effects of all sorts of,
reforms and, and how it'll actually affect council implement- affect
councils when it's, when it's rolled out or when the legislation is passed.
And I think it's important that that voice gets, gets
maintained, post the new
ministry, getting stood up, and it doesn't get lost within the wider,
the, the many other competing
, policy areas that there will be within that, that ministry.
Because it's, it's, even now it's, it's pretty difficult to get that
really,
to have central government have a sound understanding, I suppose, of, of how
policies are gonna actually affect local government, how much it's gonna cost, how
easy it's gonna be to implement, to implement for councils.
And, and from our point of view, it's really critical that that voice is
maintained.
Good. Thank you very much. Uh, look, we have met time.
I think that's a good spot to end it on.
Uh, we appreciate your very thorough submission, and all your insights today
and, and, and valuable feedback. So thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Take care.
So we'll now move on to our next submission, which
is
WasteMinz.
Kia ora Dave, welcome to the select committee this
afternoon. Uh, we have your submission.
You have 20 minutes with us, so, we'll hand it over to you
to talk us through it and, then we'll open up the
questions.
Well, to begin with, thank you very much for hearing from us
today. We really appreciate the opportunity.
My name is Dr Dave Bull. I am a member of the board of the
Waste Management Institute New Zealand.
That's the capacity that I'm speaking to you in today.
I also happen to be a site contamination specialist.
Uh, definitely very happy to receive any particularly technical
questions on those matters as they come
up. I'll endeavor to
share... No, I cannot share. Doesn't matter.
I will speak to our,
submission as we go. I did have a presentation, but it's not
important.
Uh, who is
WasteMinz? We are the largest representative body of
Aotearoa New Zealand's waste resource recovery and
contaminated land sectors with three hundred and fifteen member
organizations, waste operators,
materials recovery facilities, TAs, community groups and so on
and so on and so forth.
Uh, of course, I think like
everybody, we support resource management
reform. We support well integrated, nationally consistent
planning. We support improved clarity, reduced regulatory
complexity, greater certainty for planning, consenting, and investment
decisions. And we stand ready to help develop national
instruments for the waste sector and for contaminated
land. We have a long track record producing and maintaining nationally
recognized guidance, and assisting the Ministry for the Environment in
the same.
I'd like to speak to some issues regarding contaminated
land in particular
because contaminated land often has an awkward place
in, the re- resource management regulation,
and this iteration is no different.
Uh, where the responsibilities for contaminated land should
lie, how they should be allocated,
and how the historic nature of contaminated
land is dealt with, those are all always very difficult
matters. It seems to us that the
two current bills
make a rod for their own back in that regard
because there is no obvious bright line
between the duties of regional councils and those of
territorial authorities. Regional
councils will regulate and manage the discharge of
contaminants to protect human health and the life-supporting
capacity of the natural environment.
Those certainly sound like contaminated land and indeed contaminated water and
air functions. But on the other hand, territorial
authorities for their part must also regulate and manage
contaminated land. So quite how the
responsibility moves from a regional council
regulating discharge to a territorial authority regulating the
resulting contaminated land, which may itself continue
discharging contaminants into the wider environment, which would
be a regional council problem, that back and forth handing over
in our view seems likely to result in
issues. Uh, I would also point out that under
the current resource management legislation, regional councils must
maintain contaminated land registers for the benefit of
TAs. That is a function which is no longer mentioned
in the current bills, and I wonder what will become of
it. Equally
difficult and perplexing is that in the Natural
Environment Bill, contaminant
includes any substance, including a bunch of things, including
microorganisms, energy, and heat that
changes the physical, chemical, or biological condition of
water, land, or air. That's a very
wide definition, and quite
puzzlingly, it doesn't have an element of adverse in
it. We would think that a contaminant would be something which would have an
adverse effect. Whereas, for example, if I irrigate my field
with water, I'm going to change its physical condition by
making it wet, but clearly that should not make it
contaminated land as a consequence.
There might be controls on water use or water quality, but the mere fact that I'm
making the soil wet shouldn't make water a contaminant.
Yet read literally, that's
the... I'm not suggesting that anybody would, but it's
very difficult to make out from this definition what would or would not be
a contaminant. Moving over to
the planning bill, we have a different
definition.
Although a con- it, it, says in the planning bill
that contaminant has the same meaning as in the
Natural, Environment Act,
contaminated land is defined differently from contaminant
in the planning bill.
And contaminated land means land that has a hazardous
substance in or on it that is reasonably likely to have
significant adverse effects on the
environment.This term hazardous
substance is not defined, although there is a
often definition of harmful substance, a term which does not appear
anywhere within the bill. Hazardous
substance you might think would be taken from the Hazardous Substances and New
Organisms Act, but there's nothing to say that this is so,
and the definition in that act was for very different purposes, and it will be very
problematic. It wouldn't, for example, include, radioactive
materials. They couldn't be contaminants if you were doing that.
The HASNO has some very specific tests for
what is or is not a hazardous substance, and it also has a
notion of quantity in it, which is something that's
completely omitted from a definition of contaminant under the
Natural Environment Bill.
So I would really urge you to consider why these two
bills have different definitions of what one would think would be the
same thing, and whether
it is possible not only to come up with a unified definition but one which does
what you want it to. Oh, and one more point.
Uh, the planning bill refers only to significant
adverse effects on the environment.
It doesn't mention human health, which is an odd omission given the purpose of
that bill.
I want to talk next about existing contaminated
land.
A very important point which
I, I feel that the Natural Environment Bill is vague
upon is whether discharge
could include allowing a contaminant to escape from an
existing contaminated site, a thing called
passive discharge. Under the current, RMA
framework, there is a lot of argument as to whether there is any such thing as a
passive discharge, whether it has to have occurred before the RMA
was established, et cetera. It's a very vexed issue which
we haven't sorted out in over thirty years, and again, it would be
wonderful if you could clarify that matter within the bill
itself. I also wonder, and
this isn't really dealt with in our submission, it's a point that's come up
since. If a re- regional council
brings in a new rule relating to what contamination
is, perhaps because of a new contaminant that we've only just
discovered, we saw this with, PFAS,
perfluoroalkyl substances in firefighting foams
from airports. If a new contaminant appears and a new rule is
made, does that, mean that,
contaminated sites, owners or those who caused
contamination could become, could have regulatory relief
available to them?
In other words, can the government save you from the contamination you didn't know
you'd caused? That I think is a potentially financially very
major question. Turning to the
planning bill, territorial authorities must
regulate and manage contaminated land.
Does this include managing land that is already
having significant adverse effects?
Imagine, for example, a house built on land
that is contaminated. The Resource Management Act does not
allow a regulator to do anything about that situation,
and WasteMINZ has estimated that perhaps as much as ten percent of
our housing stock
could be on land that is lead contaminated, for
example. So if it does include
managing land that is already having adverse effects, then that's a very new
power for RM authorities. If on the other
hand it doesn't, then I do not see how your
objective of, removing
risks to human health and the environment can be given effect to if it doesn't
include existing sites that aren't changing their
use.
I want to deal next with naturally occurring
contaminants. Committee may not be aware that naturally
occurring contaminants are quite widespread in New Zealand.
Natural asbestos, natural arsenic,
fluoride,
acid sulfate soils, hydrogen sulfide, methane.
That doesn't seem to be well covered in either bill because in both of them,
natural hazard refers only to occurrences like
earthquakes and tsunami.
So you're not giving yourselves any power to deal with, for
example, hydrogen sulfide,
e-emitted from natural soils in, let us say, Rotorua, or
arsenic in rivers which is of natural origin, or any such
thing.
We would recommend that as the Natural and
Built Environments Bill did, that you include in both bills in the
definition of natural hazard, land that contains naturally
occurring contaminants that pose an ongoing risk to human
health.
I now want to deal with the planning bill,
specifically. WasteMINZ and its members are very
grateful and very supportive
that you have included waste disposal and resource recovery
facilities in infrastructure.
Anybody who hasn't had their rubbish bins collected
will know that, the issues
involving the-- waste is a critical service.
If it's not provided for adequately and it doesn't happen, bad things happen very
soon. And right now within New Zealand, there are already several
regions like Taranaki, for example, that don't
have their own Class One landfills, their own municipal fills,
and that putsWaste management on the
edge. The ability to,
designate land for those purposes will be really, really useful and important.
Thank you. Uh, something that
we're generally concerned about is that developing and updating national standards
is critical to the success of both bills.
Yet so far as we can tell, expert input is currently
optional, and we would like to urge you to strengthen the
requirement for, expert input
in national standards and in resource con- granting resource
consents. In that regard, we
are specifically concerned that regulating contaminated
land may be too technical for territorial
authorities.
Leaving aside unitary authorities, I now currently know of
no territorial authority that employs a
contaminated site specialist. They can't afford to.
It's too rare and, part-time an
activity. But if they're made responsible for
this, and they have to have enforcement officers on the ground checking whether
people have met the criteria of their permitted activity
standards, that lack of, skill,
capability, and capacity is going to be exposed very
quickly.
Finally, I'd like to talk about the Natural Environment Bill in particular.
We're particularly concerned about what will
happen when an environmental limit is already
exceeded. This is the very definition of a contaminated
site, something which in the past has already exceeded the
environmental limit imposed on
it. Uh,
and similarly, if you look at the national
environmental standard for air quality, that is a tacit
acknowledgement that we make too much greenhouse gas
emissions by quite a long way, and it's necessary to take action to
bring our emissions down to some suitably
low level. But it is not clear from the
bill, which seems to talk about, limits being approached and
allocations being limited, quite how that's going to work in a case
where a limit has long been exceeded.
Uh, excuse the minutiae, but I'd like to point out,
Section 258 (1)
in which a local authority or
EPA can have a polluter of contaminated land
reimburse them for costs incurred preventing or remedying
adverse effects. It is crucial that the bill is
clear as to whether that's a retrospective liability or
not. Legally, it's very challenging to go
after a pollutant for something that happened before an act was
passed. On the other hand, in the case of contaminants, if you
can't go after the polluter
for all the hundreds of thousands of existing contaminated sites,
then the legislation may be of little value.
Uh-
Look, I just wanted to jump in there, Dave-
Yeah, righty-ho. Look-
... because we have got a couple of questions
... if you want to cut to questions at any time, please go right ahead.
I, I had two points to go. Uh, the last one I'll just throw
in. Uh, much h- we are also concerned that
regulating the emissions of major landfills, may be too
technical for regional councils, and it's something that should be handled
centrally.
Look, thank you.
If you've got any... Ready for your question.
Thank you. We've got a couple of questions, so we'll go first to Cameron Luxton.
Uh, yes. Thank you, Dave. Um, look, I live in the Bay of Plenty, and, I'm
aware of a few developments in which contaminated soil, soil was being
required to be moved, across the, to a
different region to be disposed of.
And I've, I mean, my question for you is, I've tried to find this, do you have any
idea how much contaminated soil is dumped in landfills every
year? And, do you... And then a follow-up question after you answer
that, if you can, is how much risk is
actually in these? And does, does some of this contamination
risk actually justify the, the movement of large amounts of soil?
Thanks for that wonderful question, Cameron.
It's, something that's really occupying us at
WasteMINZ, and we've only just finished a Ministry for the Environment
funded project to look at the disposal of contaminated-
Oh
... soils.
Uh, at the moment, something like
40% of what goes into your average Class 1
municipal landfill is soil.
For Class 2s, it's 79%. For higher
classes, it's virtually everything.
We're getting rid of millions of tons
of soil every year into landfills.
Uh, mostly, but that soil has extremely low levels
of contamination. And thinking of you in the Bay of Plenty, one
reason that that's being dug up is because the Bay of Plenty has extremely
tight clean fill criteria, whereas the Waikato next to you
has much more realistic criteria.
And so that which is clean in the Waikato is somehow dirty in the Bay of
Plenty. This is crying out for a more reasonable national
standard, and it's something we've been campaigning for.
Uh, however resource management reform goes, please
reform that.
Thank you.
Thanks for that point, Dave. Uh, Larn Farm has a
question.
Tena koe. Thank you so much for your submission.
Um,
there's been identified, you know, a number of gaps
across these bills, and particularly in the environmental space.
One thing that has kind of emerged from submissions is this
idea of aMaintain or improve
clause as kind of like a catchall if there
are gaps. Is that something that could work in
the sort of hazardous sites
or contaminated,
land area, like a sort of maintain or improve clause?
Or would it, would it... You kind of need your own thing, and is that why you're
being so specific about definitions and that kind of thing, because it's so
technical?
I would love to say that we can maintain or
improve New Zealand's contamination
status. I don't think that would be a
realistic text at this time, because
we continue, necessarily at the moment, continue to,
for example, apply cadmium in fertilizers
or copper in fungicides. And
despite our be- best efforts, bits of lead and
asbestos do fall off things as they're being demolished, and so on and so
forth. I don't think... When contaminated land regulations were
introduced to New Zealand, it was thought there were perhaps only a few thousand
contaminated sites, and that through diligent
action and stern resolve, we would remediate them within a few
years. We know that, many contaminated
sites are better measured by area
rather than by counting them. But as I've already said, it's
probable that, you know,
the number of contaminated sites would be hundreds of
thousands. I don't think... We, we may
make, we may eat away at that, we may pick off the worst ones, but
improve? That's a big word for a task of that
magnitude.
Thank you so much.
Look, thank you very much, Dave. A really insightful submission.
Uh, we have met time. We appreciate your time this afternoon,
and, and your submission, you know, raising quite a unique area
as well, so, for our consideration, so thank you.
Any more help we can be, we will do that. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
So we now move on to our next submission, Powerco.
Uh, and we can see you there,
Adam.
And I think, have you got someone else coming through as well?
That's correct. We're just waiting on, Jason-
Jason
... who's our CE.
Okay. Yep.
And there we go. We can see Jason. Uh, welcome both to
the select committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us, so take your submission as read, and we'll hand it
over to you to talk us through it, and then we'll open up for
questions.
Kia ora. Thank you. And look, thanks for the opportunity this afternoon.
Um, I have, um... I'm Jason Franklin, I'm chief executive of
Powerco, and I have Adam Tu- Dufour with me this afternoon as well.
I'll provide just a brief outline a, regarding Powerco,
then I'll hand over to Adam. Um, firstly,
Powerco is Aotearoa New Zealand's largest fuel,
electricity and gas distributor by network length.
Uh, and we serve more than a million Kiwis across the North
Island. Um, this represents 46% of the
country's gas connections and almost 20% of all electricity
connections for New Zealand. And we employ over 600
staff across the motu. Our electricity distribution
network extends over 29,000 kilometers, and our
gas network covers more than
6,200. Um, as you, as you'd expect with this
wide geographical reach, our infrastructure
traverses a diverse range of environments: urban,
rural and remote. And by way of example, our
networks on the Coromandel Peninsula pass through outstanding
natural features and landscapes, significant natural
areas, the coastal marine area, conservation land,
wetlands, and multiple planning zones.
Uh, we're a requiring authority o- operating across six regions
and under 29 different district plans.
We're also listed as a lifelines utility under the Civil
Defense Emergency Management Act 2002,
reflecting the central role of our services in supporting community
resilience and emergency response.
Our existing distribution infrastructure
must be maintained, repaired and upgraded to ensure reliable supply
and to meet increasing demand, and especially through the
electrification of the New Zealand economy, which is now
underway. Um, this i- includes
expanding capacity, improving resilience, and supporting the
uptake of low emission technologies.
Meeting this demand while managing environmental and planning constraints
is vital to achieving New Zealand's net zero
target. Uh, in summary, we're very supportive
of the proposed legislation. I'll now hand over to
Adam Dufour, head of environment at Powerco, for some specific
feedback.
Uh, thank you, Jason. Uh, so we agree with the intent of the
reforms, particularly greater consistency in planning documents.
As mentioned previously, the Powerco network spans 29 territorial
authorities, which means complying with and participating in 29
district plans. We support fewer, faster plans, but note
that in reality, the same amount of plans are retained at a local level, with each
territorial authority retaining a district plan chapter.
We welcome the bill's intent to reduce consents and permits in favor of permitted
activities. This direction of travel is the right one.However, we have
significant concerns about how the bill is currently drafted.
It appears to require all permitted activities to be registered unless they fall
within the narrow exemptions set out in Section one fifty-one.
The problem is that the vast majority of our day-to-day operations are already
permitted activities. Under the bill as drafted, every one of these would be
captured by the registration requirement.
This would create an enormous and unintended compliance burden, and
critically, it would dramatically slow the delivery of our lifeline services to the
communities that depend on them. We do not believe that this is the intended
outcome. We urge the committee to clarify the drafting so that
registration is reserved for activities that genuinely warrant oversight,
not routine operations that are permitted precisely because they pose no
significant issue. We support a more targeted approach to public
notification. In our experience, this mechanism has not been well
used. While we support the intent of clause fourteen
one J to remove duplication as between other legislation, there
are circumstances where planning and consenting matters necessarily overlap
with matters dealt, matters dealt with under other legislation.
One important example of this is the New Zealand Electrical Code of Practice for
Electrical Safe Distances, ECP thirty-four.
The code's primary purpose is to protect persons, property, vehicles,
and mobile plant from harm or damage from the electrical hazards.
This code has operated largely as the ambulance at the bottom of the hill, and it
is our strong view that this important electricity safety code be
embedded within the new system, bringing safety to the forefront of
planning. We have provided an alternative wording solution within the body of our
submission to help address this. However, national
instruments will need to do the heavy lifting.
With regards to streamlined designation processes, we do not support
allowing national rules to prevail over designations and consider this
undermines the efficiency and certainty that designations are intended to
provide. Infrastructure providers require certainty around the
services they provide. For Powerco, this means being able to build,
operate, maintain, and upgrade electricity substations
without unnecessary regulatory oversight.
This problem already exists under the RMA, and it's disappointing that it hasn't
been resolved through the bills. For example, the NES for contaminated
soils adds significant cost and time delays, which could have been
more appropriately addressed under the outline plan process, soon to be
construction project plans. Our substation sites are secure and
exclude public ac-access, and our health and safety and work site protocols
already address many of the standard conditions that are routinely imposed via
consents. We welcome faster and cheaper dispute
resolution
through the concept of a planning tribunal.
Having the ability for an independent body to review decisions made in the
processing of consents and permits, requests for further
information, and interpretation of consent conditions will increase access
to justice, improve affordability, and assist to balance a
system that is currently weighted towards the decision maker.
Given the close interdependence of the bills, as evidenced by the extensive
cross-referencing between them, is greater than a hundred and seventy
cross-references, we consider there is a strong case for amalgamating the bills
into a single integrated statute.
Amalgamation would improve coherence, accessibility, and interpretive clarity
by enabling the full policy and procedural framework to be read and applied as a
unified whole. This is particularly important for linear infrastructure, which
routinely traverses multiple environments and may engage both land
use, planning, and natural environmental regulations
simultaneously within a single project or asset
corridor. A split legislative framework increases the risk of
duplication, conflicting policy signals, and inconsistent
decision-making for activities that inherently cut across both
domains. We acknowledge that the intention
is for there to be no hierarchy between the goals within each bill, but notice a
distinct difference in the strength of language used between the bills.
For example, the Natural Environment Bill goal uses terms
enable, safeguard, and protect, while the Planning Bill
uses-- or Planning Bill goals use ensure, support, and
plan and provide for. Given that the system flows down from the goals,
it is essential that the goals properly provide for infrastructure, which must
include protecting existing infrastructure, allowing for ongoing
operation, maintenance, and upgrades, and enabling new
infrastructure. We have suggested amendments that strengthen the
infrastructure outcome within the Planning Bill by aligning with language used
in the Natural Environment Bill goals.
We have also sought to ensure that infrastructure is recognized within the Natural
Environment Bill. In many cases, infrastructure already forms part of the
existing environment within many natural areas.
A notable omission from the goals within each bill is one relating to the effects
of climate change, as seen in part seven of the RMA.
The general policy statement within the explanatory note of both bills includes a
reference to adapting to the effects of climate change.
Aotearoa New Zealand's target of reaching net zero greenhouse gas emissions
by twenty fifty depends on the electrification of our economy.
To meet this expected demand, networks like ours will be relied upon to facilitate
process heat conversions and support renewable generation.
These are important considerations when weighing up effects versus outcomes under
the current RMA framework, where tensions arise between the natural environment and
infrastructure. We therefore consider that inclusion of climate change related
goals
warrant consideration. The explanatory note states
that each bill will have one corresponding NPD, which is intended
to be short,
targeted document made up of objectives, policies, and directives that provide
direction on the goals, such as economic growth, housing,
infrastructure, and environmental protection, including how to
manage conflicts between these matters.
The effectiveness of the proposed system for our networks will hinge on
clear, durable national policy direction.
Overly short and concise policy risks losing essential intent and
sector-specific guidance. Electricity and gas networks are
long-lived, capital-intensive assets that underpin housing
development, resilience, and decarbonization.National direction must
therefore be sufficiently detailed, coherent across instruments, and
stable over time to support investment certainty.
We also note uncertainty in how conflicts between the planning bill and natural
environment bills will be resolved, as it is unclear whether
greater weight will be given to impacts on the built environment or on people
and the natural environment. Lastly, and most importantly,
we seek greater involvement of the infrastructure sector in the development of
national instruments. The government has set a very ambitious and compressed time
frames for the development and release of national instruments.
As drafted, there is currently no predi-pre-notification requirement to consult
with infrastructure providers. It is critical that infrastructure providers are
provided with the opportunity cons- to consider and provide advice to the minister
before the general public is notified.
Leaving submissions from infrastructure providers to the general round of
submissions, particularly where further submission rounds or hearings are not
available, limits the ability of infrastructure providers to test and
provide feedback on subsequent versions.
A recent example of the problems that can arise with inadequate engagement can
be seen within the NES on detached minor residential
units. A practical example of this would be the development of
standardized zones, where policymakers make assumptions on zone content and
applicability in lieu of robust consultation with infrastructure
providers. A standardized urban zone that does not consider things such as
boom or pole top batteries, or the ability to integrate a zone
substation within the space undermines the sector's ability to deliver an
essential service. The Infrastructure Practitioners Group are a
well-established group of infrastructure providers familiar to MBIE that could be
used to stress test national instruments during development to assist the speed
at which this legislation is being delivered.
Thank you for your time, and we open up to any questions.
Thank you very much for, that very
good submission, obviously covering a lot of
areas. So, look, we'll go to Scott Willis first, for a
question.
Thank you, Jason and Adam, great submission. Really appreciate that.
And you've, talked about regional spatial plans
and that you publicize asset management plans for a ten-year plan of
works on the network. Uh, and by the way,
congratulations for the community energy activator last year I think you, you
ran. Um, but, I'm just, I'm just thinking
about local area energy planning.
Would local area energy planning enable better
asset, asset management? Local area en-energy planning
involving local government, iwi, community, and the
energy sector like, like Powerco, but also Transpower
and, and developers, re- renewable
developers. Um, is that something that you see as
helping you understand where you could go in the future and where
demand is going to be and, and what you'd need to provide?
Uh, th-thanks, Scott. I'll, make some comments and hand over to
Adam if he's got some more to add as well.
Um, Powerco does do a lot of, more
regional energy plans. Uh, we, have done so in
conjunction, especially with ECA, where we look at different parts
of the country and work with local stakeholders, including local
authorities and, businesses and others in the regions
to develop those regional plans for energy use.
Um, and that-that's very important given, you know, as part of our
network region is in Taranaki and, then other parts in
Coromandel and Tauranga. So very different regional,
economic drivers. So we do plan down to the
regional level. Our asset management plan, does
specify different, regional growth and other challenges
that we're, and opportunities we are facing.
Um, but I'll, I'll hand over to you, Adam, to give s- any more specifics on,
on this. Yeah, thanks, Jason. Thanks, Scott, for the
question. Um, Powerco is probably already actively doing work in this
space. As we see, we have different approaches to different regions.
Uh, the Coromandel is a good example where we already have,
battery, or hybrid battery, as we call them,
BESS, battery energy storage systems, which help facilitate,
energy requirements in those areas in lieu of being able
to put in poles and wires. Um, we're also doing a lot of
exten-extensive work in our LV visibility, which
is, which will help, as part of that whole data package that's
required. But I mean, if there's a holistic approach to it, it would certainly be a
benefit, and I think that's something we would be on board with.
And if I could have a, a sup on that, Madam Chair.
Um, yeah, we might, 'cause we are running out of time, and David McLeod,
has his hand up for a question. So we'll move to
David.
Uh, thank you, Jason and Adam for the submission.
I just want to talk to the, part where you're, commenting on national
instruments. And in particular, I suppose it's really
about the, draft of powers of the minister currently in, in, in
creating national instruments, and you are, are putting
recommendations there of a particular process a, a
minister should take. Could you comment a bit about the importance
of what you're actually recommending there?
Sorry, what... Have you got a, submission point there, David, I can just refer
back to?
Uh, it's para, fifty.
Fifty.
On page twelve, and you've got recommendations there.
Um, I think it's talking to the fact that the minister is draft and has got,
powers with the, national instruments.
And I think you're suggesting there that the consultation, that usage
should be taken, taken by the, the
minister, before notifying
national instruments.
Yeah. That's, essentially-
Because of the compressed timeframes and the fact there's only gonna be one
consultation round, we th- we feel it's, it's important that,
infrastructure-related matters are technically and
practically correct. Um, so having a pre-notification engagement
also allowing the sector to help shape what those national
instruments look like. Because they do a lot of the heavy lifting in the system,
it's, it's critical that, that they're done right.
So I guess the concern from the sector is that if, if there's only one round of
submissions available, that the, intent of the national
instruments potentially might get lost, and there's no, there's
no mechanism to circle back and just ensure that prior to them being
gazetted, that they're checked for, to be technically accurate.
Um, yeah, like the DMRU was probably an
example of that, where the, consultation package focused on,
reverse sensitivity, and particularly around, you know, electrically
safe distances. But that was lost through the, process
and, and ended up not being, as
intended, so now there has to be some, some rework.
So I guess it's just to avoid situations like that, and to, to get it correct.
And s- and stop the backloading of the system.
If it's not done correctly, then the district councils are gonna, be lumped
with the, appeals and potentially bespoke provisions.
Thank you, Adam.
Thank you. Look, one last quick question, Scott.
We've got two minutes. Oh, and
you're on mute. Just pop your audio on there.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, I guess there's,
there's a, there's a big question about the value of providing certainty
for infrastructure development around the need for a
national energy strategy, and such a thing
we've talked about for a long time.
Do you think should, should there be a
willingness from government and opposition to develop a bipartisan
national energy strategy, that would be a helpful thing for the
sector? And, and could you get behind
that?
Um, thanks, Scott. Look, I think bipartisan support
on energy strategy and policy would be a very good thing.
Um, so yes, I think it's been our position for quite
some time to have a national strategy or,
a definitely policy and direction that's bipartisan,
especially as we transition,
and move through the electrification of the New Zealand
economy. So having, clear, policy
settings there will help the right investments be made at the right
time. Um, and look, we're, we're seeing that somewhat with,
changes we've seen over recent years where infrastructure
providers get ready to, invest in
significant upgrades through, stimulus that's come
from likes of GIDDHI and car fee baits.
Then when, that stops, you know,
you need to change your long-term plan.
So having consistent... And I'm, I'm making no
judgments about any of those policies.
I think it's more that having consistent policies
allow us to make long-term investments with certainty.
Um, the other point here too is the investments we
make, you know, we're a regulated infrastructure, ultimately the
consumers pay for, the investments that are
made, so ensuring we do that, in the
right timing, is very important.
Because if you don't, you have things such as
intergenerational inequities about who's paying for what and who's getting the
benefits of it. So yeah, that, I, I do think that's important.
Thanks, Scott.
Look, thank you very much. I think that's a, a good spot to end,
it on. We appreciate your time today, you know, and your really
good submission, so thank you very much.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Appreciate it.
So we now move on to our next submitter, Alex
McMillan.
And Alex, we can see you there. Welcome to the Select Committee
this afternoon. You have 10 minutes with us.
So we'll hand it over to you to talk us through your submission, and then if we
have some time, we'll open for questions.
E ngā rangatira, tena koutou. Um, kia ora, everyone.
Thanks so much for the chance to come and talk to you this afternoon.
Um, I really appreciate it. I'm a public health doctor and a professor of
public health, with a, a whole lot of experience
in the connections between public health and natural and built
environments. Um, and over multiple
resource management reform processes over many years, I've made
some repeated fundamental kind of background points that I'll make
again here, that health, starts in people's
neighborhoods, in fresh water, in clean
air, clean land, safe climate,
and well-designed, urban
environments. Um, that there,
that, there's neither public health, nor economic
wellbeing without healthy, well-functioning ecosystems and
well-designed cities, and these building blocks of
health are currently unfairly distributed, and they, that
drives, many of the health injustices we see in
health outcomes, by income, by age
group, by ethnicity, and that these things
are things that people have no individual control over.
Um, as well as, the risk of handing on health
injustices to future generations through poor
planning and environmental protection
now. Um, the Global Burden of Disease
project, which measures the burden of disease from different risk
factors of disease using epidemiology and routinely collected
population data across countries, estimates that
environmental conditions, both natural and built
environment,Uh, contribute more than a quarter of the
total burden of disease on the health system.
Um, and these are a mixture of health effects from environmental pollution and poor
urban planning, including things like road traffic injury, water
pollution, and air pollution.
This doesn't just cause terrible impacts of disease, and injury, and disability on
people's lives, and pressure on the health system,
but healthy people are critical to economic
wellbeing. This makes environmental and
land use planning critical for public health protection and
promotion. Human health protection and
promotion are not done well at the moment in resource management, and I
support resource management reform because currently
ecosystems and biodiversity measures are heading in the wrong
direction, while built environment planning could be vastly improved
and more integrated for healthy, well-planned, high-quality housing for
all, healthy and equitable urban design and
transport, and health protecting water
infrastructure. Public health involvement in
plan making and consenting often adds value and picks up
important risks to population health,
often saving lives and disease, through placing
conditions on consents or shifting planning towards more healthy
design. But at the moment, it's piecemeal, it's
inconsistent, and public health is often treated
as one, member of the public, as a member of the public.
So why, while I acknowledge that need for reform, I'm opposing both
the planning and natural environment bills in their current form because I think
they represent a substantial risk to public health and safety,
including directly through poor provisions for upholding environmental
limits and poor settings for the planning of built
environments, but also indirectly because they fail to
meaningfully improve the protection of ecosystems and
biodiversity, including in the context of climate change,
and therefore take us in the wrong direction.
The natural and built environments...
Uh, the Natural Environments Bill has public health as one goal,
but it's restricted to the negative effects of discharges,
and the, the Planning Bill doesn't even include human health and
wellbeing as a goal. In neither is there any
recognition that human health rests on ecosystem
health, or that built environment design can either be health
promoting and fairness promoting or harmful to
health.
I've outlined the six major reasons for my opposition from a public health
perspective in my, submission
relating to the separation of environmental protection and land use, which
need to be more integrated, not less integrated, relating to the
goals and scope, the inadequacy in addressing Te Tiriti obligations
with impacts on Hauora Māori, the egregious proposals for
regulatory relief, the failure of environmental limits to be
upheld, including the strange different processes between health and
environmental limit setting, and the narrowing of the scope
of interest in who can participate, including for public health,
and the decrease in the ability for, for public health to add value to
plan making and consent. I want to really emphasize
though that property owners cannot be allowed to harm others with
impunity, and it's absolutely perverse to be proposing that
local councils be forced to pay them to stop as regulatory
relief. I've made four recommendations and would
be really willing to provide public health input into any process of
review, noting that independent health expertise has been lacking in
resource management reform over time.
I'll leave the rest of the time for questions.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you very much, Alex, for your submission,
and all the documents that you've provided us with.
Look, we will, go to Lan Pham for a
question.
Tena koe, Alex. Thank you so much for that submission.
Um, I wanted to ask you
about, you know,
human health and why do you think
it is so hard to just very clearly
get basic human health provisions in
legislation? Is it, like, a perception about
costs? Is it, like, like, what is it from your perspective,
over so many years in your field?
So I think while, the, the
purpose, of the current, Resource
Management Act 1991 talks about health and the
purpose, it does poorly at,
enacting that in processes of plan making and
consenting. Um, that,
there's been this siloing, I think, for a long time in,
the way that, health and environment have been thought
about in legislation and policymaking in Aotearoa, New
Zealand, where the health system,
hospitals and health centers, doctors,
and hospitals have been expected to pick up
the, pick up the, be the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff
without really thinking clearly about how do we, how we can,
prevent illness and disease in a, in a good way through
legislation in other sectors of, of, of
government, including environment.
Thank you. And then can I ask one more, Chair?
Yeah, one more. Yeah.
And then also, what do you think the barriers
are to us sort of learning from, you know, in
some instances really tragic experiences that we have had, and
I think particularly in the public health area, the Havlock
North
tragedy. Um, you know, there's very clear
recommendations that came from that
inquiry-That I don't believe are necessarily
picked up in these two pieces of
legislation. Um, what do you think
might be stopping us there from actually taking that kind of advice and, and
actually changing our system for the better?
Uh, well, nothing's stopping, the p- the
involvement of health in, re- revision of things
like r- the Resource Management Act.
There's, there's expertise there to be called upon to
assist with that. At the moment, there are
substantial, legislative policy
scope, institutional capacity,
barriers to, meaningful partnership
between, between public health
expertise and, say, local government plan
making. Um, there, there isn't really any expectation
that that would happen. Um, and at the moment, there are substantial kind of
constraint barriers on public health from working with local
government. Um, and, and no re-
no real, institutional or structural,
expectations or, or structures for that to
happen.
Okay.
Look, thank you very much, Alex, for your
submission this afternoon. We appreciate your time, and
insights.
Thank you. Thank you. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
So we, now move on to our last
submission of the day. Um, we have an apology
from, Manu, who unfortunately is unwell and can't join us,
on our agenda. So we're going to move forward to the
Environmental Defense
Society.
And we can see there Greg.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have the great last spot of the day, so,
we look forward to hearing, your submission. Uh, please take it as read.
Uh, you know, it's a pretty substantial submission with a lot of points.
So if you wanna talk us through the main points, and then we'll open up for some
questions.
Yeah, sure. Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and kia ora
koutou. I'd just like to thank by, uh-- I'd like to start by thanking
the committee, for giving EDS, a bit of an extension for
filing our, as you say, quite long, hefty submission,
and for hearing from us today. Um, so I just wanna
begin by making a few preliminary points, and then I'm
gonna cover what we think are the really key take home messages from our
submission. Um, so the, the first preliminary point is that EDS
has a long history of engagement in RM reform.
Uh, we've published extensively over the last decade.
Uh, most recently, I'll do a bit of a plug for this, if the camera will get it,
this book from last year, which deals with a lot of the issues that the
committee is facing with respect to both of these bills, and the
EAG's report.
Um, and the upshot of all our work really is that we support, like a lot of
people, the need for RM reform, but only if
what we are getting is an improvement on what we've
got. Uh, second is that we need to
get this right as a matter of urgency. Now is the time.
Uh, we can't afford to spend millions on restarting the reform
process every time government changes.
Uh, deep changes are needed to these bills, but
we think that that's completely possible within the select committee process and
should be done. And,
finally, our view is that the coalition commitments to
protecting private property rights can be upheld without the
complexity, the uncertainty, the excesses
of what is in these bills as they're drafted, and we've
provided some track changes that, that will do that in our submission
at the end in an appendix.
So what, what I would like to do is just for the next kind of seven or eight
minutes, just address, four if I'm able, or three if I run
out of time because I do wanna leave some time for questions, the really key kind
of take home messages from our submission.
Um, and those outline what's, what's needed to make them
acceptable. Uh, so it's regulatory relief,
environmental limits, legal standing, and,
scope. Um, so point number one
is that the current, approach to regulatory relief across both
bills is completely wrong-headed.
Uh, there are two distinct relief pathways provided for, and I'll just
deal with them briefly in turn.
So first is the specified rules pathway.
Uh, that requires councils to make a relief framework in their plans
where specified rules are likely to have a significant impact on the reasonable
use of land. And the concern, or one of the concerns,
is the scope of specified rules is just so extremely broad.
Uh, so from an environmental perspective, the
most concerning aspect is that relief is needed not only for
SNAs, which are themselves not defined and could mean
almost any kind of area-based protection, but
also any rule whatsoever on the topic of indigenous
biodiversity. Uh, so for example, is relief
triggered by basic vegetation clearance rules found in most, if not
all, plans? Uh, yes.
Uh, protections for stands of urban trees? Yes.
Uh, rules controlling an activity on one piece of land that affects threatened
species on the dock estate next door? Yes.
Uh, where rules seek to retain canopy cover for completely different
purposes, like ensuring, drinking water quality in a
catchment?Like in the Waitākere Ranges, yes.
Uh, the purpose of the rule is completely irrelevant as long as, as it has
something to do with the topic of indigenous biodiversity.
So the provisions are also riddled with uncertainty.
So what does a significant impact mean?
It depends on what the minister wants it to mean.
Uh, what does a reasonable use mean?
There's nothing to say that excludes activities having significant environmental
effects, like destroying the last
habitat of a threatened species. Uh, what happens if
compensation is paid to a landowner and the rules are then softened or even removed
later on? Who knows? So unlike places like
Ireland, there's no obvious ability to claw that back for the public
purse. Uh, what happens if a relief framework turns out
to be more expensive than a council had foreseen when it's actually applied on the
ground? Um, so the plan might be operative, but
there's no ability to pay. So what gives?
Uh, your guess is as good as mine. It's not in the bills, the
answer. And so really, what does the-- all that uncertainty mean?
Well, bureaucracy, litigation,
complexity, all these things that are the opposite of what these
reforms have promised and intend.
Uh, it means a dramatic chilling effect on councils, and we've heard from councils,
or you've heard from many councils on this.
Uh, partly because it's unlikely they could pay for legitimate protections
or that ratepayers would be willing to pay.
Um, MFE couldn't say in support of these bills how
much it would cost. It's a stab in the dark.
Um, and partly 'cause c- some councils would be more able to pay than
others, including where, you know, the number of ratepayers in a district
or a region bears no resemblance to the importance of
the, the kinds of ecosystems or environmental values at stake.
So my mind always goes to the Mackenzie Basin, for
example. Um, and the legal and
fiscal risk, of even trying to impose these controls in the first place
will be really daunting, even if compensation's not the end result of
it. Um, and so I think Castalia estimated that it would be about half a
million dollars per plan just, just to try and put this in
there. Uh, the second relief pathway
is a more general one, a modified form of Section eighty-five, and you would have
heard a lot about this as well. Uh, again, there's
uncertainty here. So what's a severe impairment?
No one knows. So you might picture a council wanting to protect,
productive land, for vegetable growing, from urban
encroachment. And if there's a rule that, that seeks to prevent
medium density townhouses being plastered all over that,
is that a severe impairment of a reasonable use?
Well, it, it would seem pretty arguable that yes, that is, and, and
compensation is forthcoming. But, but really the most,
I think, concerning environmental aspect of this
pathway is that it applies to, land uses
that are having impacts on commons,
to which landowners clearly have no property right at all.
So for example, will councils have to compensate,
forest owners for rules that prevent or manage sediment
discharges into waterways? Um, that's, that's really not
polluter pays. That's the opposite. That's paying the polluter.
So really, th-the overall effect of this relief, framework or
both of them is risk for the environment and
unworkability for the system. And I'll just add that it's also very
unfair for councils who are being expected to pay for,
rules that are required by national direction.
So it's, it's the ultimate unfunded mandate.
Uh, and the solution is really to fix up Section eighty-five of the RMA because it
has been completely underutilized and could be made to work a lot
better. Um, that was my biggest
point. Uh, I'll go through the others a bit more quickly.
Uh, point two is about environmental limits.
So limits are the absolute rock bottom minimum outcomes
that protect the environment for human and ecological
health. Uh, they'll be crucial to any effective RM
system. Uh, it's not just for people who value birds and lizards.
It's for anyone who's concerned about the society and economy and human
health that we have in this country.
So for example, according to the Sustainable Business Council, seventy percent of
our entire export earnings depend on maintaining our natural
capital.
And limits need to be strong. A-and I won't go through the entirety of MFE's
environmental reporting, but just two things.
Almost half of groundwater moni-monitoring sites failed to meet drinking water
standards for E. coli, at least once between twenty nineteen and twenty
twenty-four. Um, and we have the highest
proportion of threatened species in the world, and that's over four
thousand. So there's issues.
To give credit where credit's due, the bones of an effective limits framework are
in these bills, which gives me hope because they can be fixed up through this
process. Um, but there are five key takeaways as to
why they need strengthening. Uh, the first is that
the goals of the bills allow the minister to resolve conflicts between limits
and other goals in national policy direction, which puts limits in
a very precarious position. Uh, secondly,
regional councils and the minister are specifically directed to weigh
up the economic aspirations of communities against environmental
protection when setting limits. Now, that's not a limit, and it doesn't deserve the
name.
The third is where minimum outcomes are set nationally.
Regional councils are still allowed to make them weaker, as long as they justify it
using a cost-benefit analysis. Uh,
fourthly, there are big constraints on using regulation, like
input and land use controls, to defend limits once they're set,
which means there's gonna be a strong preference in practice for non-regulatory
mechanisms.And fifthly, there are big
exemptions for significant infrastructure.
Um, so if a, if a project's significant and has public benefit limits, essentially
won't apply.
Um,
my third point is that standing and public participation are being eroded
in some pretty alarming ways. So consenting is bad
enough. Under the Natural Environment bill,
notification's gonna be allowed only where proposals have significant adverse
effects. Uh, and we've heard others talk about this point as well.
So we're, we're talking here about projects having effects on the
commons, at which a consent applicant has, has
no interest that's greater than any other member of the
public. So more than minor effects is a way more appropriate
threshold. Uh, even where there are significant effects,
submitters will have to reside in the relevant region to submit, and
that, well, that might be intended to stop someone in Auckland from objecting to a
Wanaka and, a Wanaka McDonald's.
But in practice, it's gonna cut out most environmental NGOs who have
capacity to engage because they're at the national level, and that's
where a lot of evidence has been tested under the RMA.
Uh, participation in plan making is even worse, so
submissions are allowed only where a plan departs from standardized provisions and
national direction. So if councils choose to essentially paint by
numbers, no one pretty much gets a meaningful say about the
rules that protect the natural environment.
And if you don't live in a region, you have to prove that you have an interest
greater than that of the general public, which again, is another hurdle to
NGOs. Now just finally, ministers have given
the impression that the system is being bogged down by vexatious litigants all over
the place. Uh, but A, that's simply not the case, and
B, engagement by the public and NGOs in plan proceedings in
particular, more often than not results in better, more
robust, more enduring, and legally defensible
plans. It makes more buy-in for communities, and it means
longer term certainty and less legal risk for
developers. Um, in, in one
sentence I'll cover my fourth point, which is about scope.
Under the planning bill, clause 14 is going to dramatically change
and erode what we understand urban planning is about, healthy
communities, healthy environment and cities, and efficient land
use. Um, and the scope of the goals of the Natural
Environment bill, are so narrowly constrained that
there's gonna be no scope for doing anything above the bare minimum of
environmental limits. No enhancement, no
kaitiakitanga, a- and no efficiency of, of resource
use. So I will leave it there and open for questions.
And again, thank you very much to the committee.
Sorry, I'm muted now. We'll go... We've got a couple of questions there.
We'll go to Priyanka first. Thank you for that submission,
Greg.
Thank you. Um, and yes, thank you, very detailed
submission. Um, I have one very minor
question. I take your points around environmental limits and what you've
laid out today in your or- oral submission.
I just wanted to clarify,
which is it, it's, I think it's cl- it's
181 in your written submission, and it's about
the legal relationship between limits and environment
plans. Um, you've said that it requires
significant, strengthening and in fact the most, you know, requires the
greatest attention, and you've gone on to explain that, but I didn't
quite get the point that you were trying to get across through that,
requirement to strengthen the relationship between the two, and I wondered if you
could speak to that.
Yeah, sure. Um, I, I, I think there's, there's
several aspects to that. I mean, the, the, the important thing is that these
natural environment plans are where the, the rubber hits the road for limits.
That's where the actual rules and regulations are gonna be able to stop things
happening to defend the, the natural environment.
Um, one really big... I mean, there's lots of issues, that the purpose of them
doesn't talk about, limits. Um,
that's where, regulatory relief provisions are gonna be.
So for indigenous biodiversity you might have to have a limit, but you're
also gonna have to pay for that limit.
So what happens when those two things are incompatible for councils?
Um, there are restrictions on effects management hierarchies.
So essentially if there's no national direction saying you must avoid impacts on an
SNA, councils are not allowed to provide for that in their plan, and it has to all
be up in the air at the consenting stage.
Uh, and perhaps the most important thing I think is that there are, there are
hurdles to, to land use rules and input controls,
like for fertilizer, for stocking rates, for forestry harvesting, that kind of
thing. So a council has to be satisfied,
that all non-regulatory avenues have been
explored before going down the route
of land use controls and input controls, which in practice,
I don't think is going to lead to any of those kinds of
regulation.
Thanks.
Thank you. Look, we'll now go to Cameron Luxton for a question.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you, Greg.
You're very detailed, but, you open your submission with a whole lot of
hypothetical sort of, rhetorical questions perhaps.
One of them piqued my interest a little bit, which was you said that,
like, so, runoff from
forestry would, w- would elicit, regulatory
relief, but my... That would be a management of discharge, right?
That would be an effect under the Natural Environment bill, which does not have
regulatory relief in it. W- could you ask, could I just ask where you drew that
inference from?
Yeah. And this, this is, this is an issue with the second, relief
pathway, so this modified version of Section 85 of the RMA.
So it's, it's not to do with, schedule, is it Schedule 3, I think, of the
planning bill? The detail-
Something like that. Four, I think. Yeah. It's three or four. Yeah.
Four. Four, maybe, yes. Um-Uh, the, the issue
there is, is where, there's a
severe impairment of, reasonable land use,
then a landowner can claim relief.
Um, and that's, that's a higher threshold than under Section 85 of the RMA,
which requires land to be rendered incapable of reasonable
use. Um, and,
the, the, the concern is that,
a- and these are hypotheticals, but the concern is that anyone
discharging... I mean, the, this, this provision applies to all
provisions and plans, so it's not just about IB, or
landscape, or sites of cultural significance, it's about all provisions,
including discharges. So where there's a more than minor impact from a
discharge, and it has a severe impairment on the reasonable use of
land, then that is open for relief under the
Natural Environment Bill. So that could apply to forest-
It could, just to be clear, that could be argued to be open for relief,
that's the point you're making? But I'll, I'll make...
Well, I just think it's good to get that on the things we can ask officials about
it. Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, yeah. I mean, these are all hypotheticals, but I think one
of the risks of th- this bill is that the drafting is so open-ended that
it invites speculation about a whole lot of hypotheticals.
But I, I have heard the minister, speak about the
possibility of forestry discharges, being open
to, this form of relief, so it, it is worth raising
with officials.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Lan.
Tena koe, thank you so much for your submission, Greg.
And, and I want to ask about,
limits, and particularly what your perception
is on the legislation about what might
happen when a limit is breached, and whether there is
actually
sort of some kind of mechanism where
things, whether it be consents or the plan could be changed.
But I, I wanna give the example
of water quality, because we have heard a lot today about
farm environment plans. And, you know, for example,
I'm familiar with the, situation up
in Ashburton Lakes or to Wharekai, where
everyone, every farmer is at, you know, A in their
freshwater farm plan, and yet limits are being
breached, and actually they're getting worse.
So what's your perception of where a, a situation might
that, like that might fit with the bills as they currently
stand?
I, I think the really important thing is, is for the bills to state very
clearly that when, when an environmental limit is
breached, there is an obligation to take a regulatory
response where it's needed, and that includes the review of all
consents and attachment,
needed to, to address the problem.
Um, the, the bill- the bills
as currently drafted don't really do that adequately.
They have a long list of actions that need to happen, but they, they, they
tend to result in everything is slightly too hard.
So instead of a regulatory response, instead of,
creating a cap, instead of new rules,
instead of reviewing consent conditions, there's the requirement for an action
plan, which essentially prefers non-regulatory measures.
I mean, that's a gross oversimplification, but that's where it ends up in our
reading.
Look, time for one last question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah. Good day, Greg. Uh, thank you very much.
Um, very fulsome submission, clearly.
Um, I've got also environmental limits.
You talked about, the m- and used an example, the, the, the drinking water and,
and so forth, stuff and, yeah, and the whole...
And, like, some things though we are capable, I mean, of s- certain
things in water we're capable of treating and we nee- have to treat for, regardless
of what, what almost within m- environmental
management. I'm thinking of things like E.
coli and giardia are things that you have to, you can treat
for. So I'm just wondering h- how you account
for that in, in, in, in your view of
limits.
Well, my view of that is that that's,
you know, focusing on having to treat highly polluted water, at, at
the back end of the process is imposing a huge amount of cost
on ratepayers, just in the sense that, having to, you
know,
hydro generators having to deal with sediment entering their turbines is
imposing a whole lot of cost that needs to be passed on to electricity users.
It's much better to deal with the issue further up in the, the
process. So, you know, I, I think, Greater Wellington or maybe Wellington City
Council, was talking about the importance of protecting the, the
canopy cover in part of their regional district,
to, to maintain water quality because the, the community relies on it.
Um, which has been in place, these controls have been in place for a long, long
time. In a similar situation in the Waitākere Ranges, where one of the
main purposes of, of biodiversity protections is to maintain
water quality that comes out of that catchment.
And, you know, the alternative is, is that if councils can't pay for those
controls to remain in place, then you're gonna end up with more polluted
water, imposing costs to treat it to a, the same
level. Uh, and that just, it, it seems nonsensical to
me.
Yeah, but, just quick sup on that, Madam Chair.
But I mean, certain things you have to treat for, don't you? There, there's a risk.
Like, y- there, what is the safe risk of E. coli and giardia, for example?
I'm not quite sure how you get that out of a s- you prevent that from entering
a water system. I'm, I'm just using those as examples.
I, I take your point though on some-
Yeah
... other things, so yeah.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, it, it doesn't negate the need to treat drinking water,
absolutely not. Um, but, but it will improve the, the water quality, a-
among other things.
Yeah. Fair point. Thank you.
Look, thank you very much, Greg, for, that very full
submission. Um, lots to take on board there.
Appreciate your time on it, and all the work that's been put into it.
Uh, some valuable considerations, so thank you.
Thank you very much.
So members, that ends our public, hearings for
today. Uh, so we will now enter private
session. So, we'll have to go back into, the
link. So thank you all for, the public hearing today.
We will now, resume in private
session.